.TH groff_rfc1345 7 "2 July 2023" "groff 1.23.0"
.SH Name
groff_rfc1345 \- special character names from RFC 1345 and Vim digraphs
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Dorai Sitaram
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
.\" obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files
.\" (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction,
.\" including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge,
.\" publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software,
.\" and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
.\" subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice (including the
.\" next paragraph) shall be included in all copies or substantial
.\" portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
.\" NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
.\" CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
.\" SOFTWARE.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_rfc1345_7_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The file
.I rfc1345.tmac
defines special character escape sequences for
.MR groff 7
based on the glyph mnemonics specified in RFC 1345 and the digraph table
of the text editor Vim.
.
Each escape sequence translates to a Unicode code point,
and will render correctly if the underlying font is a Unicode font that
covers the code point.
.
.
.PP
For example,
.RB \[lq] \[rs][Rx] \[rq]
is the \[lq]recipe\[rq] or \[lq]prescription take\[rq] symbol,
and maps to the code point U+211E.
.
.I groff
lets you write it as
.RB \[lq] \[rs][u211E] \[rq],
but
.RB \[lq] \[rs][Rx] \[rq]
is more mnemonic.
.
.
.PP
For a list of the glyph names provided,
please see the file
.IR rfc1345.tmac ,
which contains definitions of the form
.
.RS
.EX
\&.char \[rs][Rx] \[rs][u211E]    \[rs]" PRESCRIPTION TAKE
.EE
.RE
.
where
.BR .char 's
first argument defines a
.I groff
special character escape sequence with a mnemonic glyph name,
its second argument is a special character escape sequence based on the
code point,
and the comment describes the glyph defined.
.
.
.PP
The RFC 1345 glyph names cover a wide range of Unicode code points,
including
supplemental Latin,
Greek,
Cyrillic,
Hebrew,
Arabic,
Hiragana,
Katakana,
and Bopomofo letters,
punctuation,
math notation,
currency
symbols,
industrial and entertainment icons,
and box-drawing symbols.
.
.
.PP
The Vim digraph table is practically a subset of RFC 1345
(being limited to two-character mnemonics),
but,
as a newer implementation,
adds four mnemonics not specified in the RFC
(the horizontal ellipsis,
the Euro sign,
and two mappings for the rouble sign).
.
These have also been added to
.IR rfc1345.tmac .
.
.
.PP
.I rfc1345.tmac
contains a total of 1,696 glyph names.
.
It is not an
error to load
.I rfc1345.tmac
if your font does not have all the glyphs,
as long as it contains the glyphs that you actually use in your
document.
.
.
.PP
The RFC 1345 mnemonics are not identical in every case to the mappings
for special character glyph names that are built in to
.IR groff ;
for example,
.RB \[lq] \[rs][<<] \[rq]
means the \[lq]much less than\[rq] sign (U+226A) when
.I rfc1345.tmac
is not loaded and this special character is not otherwise defined by a
document or macro package.
.
.I rfc1345.tmac
redefines
.RB \[lq] \[rs][<<] \[rq]
to the \[lq]left-pointing double angle quotation mark\[rq] (U+00AB).
.
See
.MR groff_char 7
for the full list of predefined special character escape sequences.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Usage
.\" ====================================================================
.
Load the
.I rfc1345.tmac
file.
.
This can be done by either adding
.RB \[lq] ".mso rfc1345.tmac" \[rq]
to your document before the first use of any of the glyph names the
macro file defines,
or by using the
.MR \%troff 1
option
.RB \[lq] "\-m rfc1345" \[rq]
from the shell.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Bugs
.\" ====================================================================
.
As the
.I groff
Texinfo manual notes,
\[lq][o]nly the current font is checked for ligatures and kerns;
neither special fonts nor entities defined with the
.B char
request
(and its siblings)
are taken into account.\[rq]
.
Many of the characters defined in
.I rfc1345.tmac
are accented Latin letters,
and will be affected by this deficiency,
.UR https://\:savannah\:.gnu\:.org/\:bugs/\:?59932
producing subpar typography
.UE .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\:rfc1345\:.tmac
implements the character mappings.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I rfc1345\:.tmac
was contributed by
.MT ds26gte@\:yahoo\:.com
Dorai Sitaram
.ME .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.UR https://\:tools\:.ietf\:.org/\:html/\:rfc1345
RFC 1345
.UE ,
by Keld Simonsen,
June 1992.
.
.
.PP
The Vim digraph table can be listed using the
.MR vim 1
command
.RB \[lq] ":help \%digraph\-table" \[rq].
.
.
.PP
.MR groff_char 7
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_rfc1345_7_man_C]
.do rr *groff_groff_rfc1345_7_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
