'\" t
.TH groff_mm 7 "2 July 2023" "groff 1.23.0"
.SH Name
groff_mm \- memorandum macros for GNU
.I roff
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_mm_7_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY "groff \-m\%m"
.RI [ option\~ .\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.
.SY "groff \-m m\%m"
.RI [ option\~ .\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU implementation of the
.I mm
macro package is part of the
.I groff
document formatting system.
.
The
.I mm
package is suitable for the composition of
letters,
memoranda,
reports,
and books.
.
.
.P
Call an
.I mm
macro at the beginning of a document to initialize the package.
.
A simple
.I mm
document might use only
.B P
for paragraphing.
.
Set numbered and unnumbered section headings with
.B H
and
.BR HU ,
respectively.
.
Change the style of the typeface with
.BR B ,
.BR I ,
and
.BR R ;
you can alternate styles with
.BR BI ,
.BR BR ,
.BR IB ,
.BR IR ,
.BR RB ,
and
.BR RI .
.
Several nestable list types are available via
.BR AL ,
.BR BL ,
.BR BVL ,
.BR DL ,
.BR ML ,
.BR RL ,
and
.BR VL ;
each of these begins a list,
to which
.B LI
adds an item and
.B LE
ends the (nested) list.
.
Customized list arrangements are supported by
.BR LB .
.
.B DS
and
.B DF
start static and floating displays,
respectively;
either is terminated with
.BR DE .
.
.
.P
.I groff mm
is intended to be compatible with the
.I mm
implementation found in the AT&T Documenter's Workbench (DWB),
with the following limitations.
.
.
.IP \[bu] 2n
Omitted features include
the logo and company name strings,
.B }Z
and
.BR ]S ,
respectively;
the encoded company site location addresses recognized as the third
argument to the
.B AU
macro;
the
.B Pv
(\[lq]private\[rq] heading)
register;
and the
.B OK
(other keywords),
and
.B PM
(proprietary markings)
macros.
.
.
.IP \[bu] 2n
The
.B CS
(output cover sheet)
macro is implemented only for memorandum type 4.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
The
.I grap
preprocessor is not explicitly supported;
no
.B G1
and
.B G2
macros
are defined.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
The registers
.BR A ,
.BR C ,
.BR E ,
.BR T ,
and
.BR U ,
typically set from the
.I troff \" generic
or
.I nroff \" generic
command lines with DWB
.IR mm ,
are not recognized.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
When setting the registers
.B L
or
.B W
from the command line,
use an explicit scaling unit to avoid surprises.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
DWB
.IR mm 's
.B nP
macro indented the second line of a paragraph to align it with the start
of the text of the first
(after the paragraph number);
.IR "groff mm" 's
does not.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
Cut marks are not supported.
.
.
.P
DWB
.I mm
supported only seven levels of heading.
.
As a compatible extension,
.I groff mm
supports fourteen,
introducing new registers
.B H8
through
.BR H14 ,
and affecting the interpretation of the
.B HF
and
.B HP
strings.
.
.
.P
Macro,
register,
and string descriptions in this page frequently mention each other;
most cross references are to macros.
.
Where a register or string is referenced,
its type is explicitly identified.
.
.IR mm 's
macro names are usually in full capitals;
registers and strings tend to have mixed-case names.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Document styles"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff mm
offers three different frameworks for document organization.
.
.BR \%COVER /\: \%COVEND
is a flexible means of preparing any document requiring a cover page.
.
.BR LT / LO
aids preparation of typical Anglophone correspondence
(business letters,
for example).
.
The
.B MT
memorandum type mechanism implements a group of formal styles
historically used by AT&T Bell Laboratories.
.
Your document can select at most one of these approaches;
when used,
each disables the others.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Localization
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff mm
is designed to be easily localized.
.
For languages other than English,
strings that can appear in output are collected in the file
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\: xx \:.tmac ,
where
.I xx
is an ISO\~639 two-letter language identifier.
.
Localization packages should be loaded after
.IR mm ;
for example,
you might format a Swedish
.I mm
document with the command
.RB \[lq] "groff \-mm \-msv" \[rq].
.
.
.P
This package can also be localized by site or territory;
for example,
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\:\%mse\:.tmac
illustrates how to adapt the output to a national standard using its ISO
3166 territory code.
.
Such a package can define a string that causes a macro file
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\:mm/\:\% territory _locale
to be loaded at package initialization.
.
If this mechanism is not used,
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\:mm/\:\%locale
is loaded instead.
.
No diagnostic is produced if these files do not exist.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Registers and strings"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Much
.I mm
behavior can be configured by registers and strings.
.
A register is assigned with the
.B nr
request.
.
.
.RS
.P
.B .nr
.I ident
.RB [ \[+-] ]\c
.I n
.RI [ i ]
.RE
.
.
.P
.I ident
is the name of the register,
and
.IR n \~is
the value to be assigned.
.
.IR n \~can
be prefixed with a plus or minus sign if incrementation or
decrementation (respectively) of the register's existing value
.RI by\~ n
is desired.
.
If assignment of a (possibly) negative
.IR n \~is
required,
further prefix it with a zero or enclose it in parentheses.
.
If
.IR i \~is
specified,
the register is automatically modified
.RI by \~i
prior to interpolation if a plus or minus sign is included in the escape
sequence as follows.
.
.
.RS
.P
.B \[rs]n\c
.RB [ \[+-] ]\c
.BI [ ident ]
.RE
.
.
.P
.IR i \~can
be negative;
it combines algebraically with the sign in the interpolation escape
sequence.
.
.
.P
Strings are defined with the
.B ds
request.
.
.
.RS
.P
.B .ds
.I ident contents
.RE
.
.
.P
.I contents
consumes everything up to the end of the line,
including trailing spaces.
.
It is a good practice to end
.I contents
with a comment escape sequence
.RB ( \[rs]\[dq] )
so that extraneous spaces do not intrude during document maintenance.
.
To include leading spaces in
.IR contents ,
prefix it with a double quote.
.
Strings are interpolated with the
.B \[rs]*
escape sequence.
.
.
.RS
.P
.B \[rs]*\c
.BI [ ident ]
.RE
.
.
.P
Register and string name spaces are distinct,
but strings and macros share a name space.
.
Defining a string with the same name as an
.I mm
macro is not supported and may cause incorrect rendering,
the emission of diagnostic messages,
and an error exit status from
.IR \%troff .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Register format"
.\" ====================================================================
.
A register is interpolated using Arabic numerals if no other format has
been assigned to it.
.
Assign a format to a register with the
.B af
request.
.
.
.RS
.LP
.BI .af\~ "R c"
.RE
.
.
.LP
.IR R \~is
the name of the register,
and
.IR c \~is
the format.
.
If
.IR c \~is
a sequence of Arabic numerals,
their quantity defines a zero-padded minimum width for the interpolated
register value.
.
.
.RS
.LP
.TS
tab(@);
lb lb
l l.
Form@Sequence
1@0, 1, 2, 3, .\|.\|., 10, .\|.\|.
001@000, 001, 002, 003, .\|.\|., 1000, .\|.\|.
i@0, i, ii, iii, iv, .\|.\|.
I@0, I, II, III, IV, .\|.\|.
a@0, a, b, c, .\|.\|., z, aa, ab, .\|.\|.
A@0, A, B, C, .\|.\|., Z, AA, AB, .\|.\|.
.TE
.RE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Fonts
.\" ====================================================================
.
In
.IR "groff mm" ,
the fonts
(or rather,
font styles)
.BR R \~(roman),
.BR I \~(italic),
and
.BR B \~(bold)
are mounted at font positions
.BR 1 ,
.BR 2 ,
.RB and\~ 3 ,
respectively.
.
Internally,
font positions are used for backward compatibility.
.
From a practical point of view,
it doesn't make a big difference\[em]a different font family can still
be selected by invoking
.IR groff 's
.B fam
request or using its
.B \-f
command-line option.
.
On the other hand,
if you want to replace just,
for example,
.RB font\~ I
with Zapf Chancery Medium italic
(available on
.IR groff 's
.B pdf
and
.B ps
output devices),
you have to use the
.B fp
request,
replacing the font at position\~2 with
.RB \[lq] .fp\~2\~ZCMI \[rq]).
.
Because the cover sheet,
memorandum type,
and
.MR \%refer 1
integration macros explicitly request fonts named
.BR B ,
.BR I ,
and
.BR R ,
you will also need to remap these font names with the
.B ftr
request,
for instance with
.RB \[lq] .ftr\~I\~ZCMI \[rq].
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Macros
.\" ====================================================================
.
An explicitly empty argument may be specified with a pair of double
quotes;
to call a macro
.B XX
with an empty second argument but non-empty first and third ones,
you could input the following.
.
.
.P
.RS
.EX
\&.XX foo \[dq]\[dq] baz
.EE
.RE
.
.
.P
Macro names longer than two characters are GNU extensions;
some shorter names were not part of DWB
.IR mm 's
published interface but are documented aspects of
.I groff mm.
.
.
.TP
.BI )E\  "level text"
Add heading text
.I text
to the table of contents with
.IR level ,
which is either\~0 or in the range 1 to\~7.
.
See also
.BR H .
.
This undocumented DWB
.I mm
macro is exposed by
.I groff mm
to enable customized tables of contents.
.
.
.TP
.BR 1C\~ [ 1 ]
Format page text in one column.
.
The page is broken.
.
.RB A\~ 1
argument suppresses this break;
its use may cause body text and a pending footnote to overprint.
.
See
.BR 2C ,
.BR MC ,
and
.BR NCOL .
.
.
.TP
.B 2C
Begin two-column formatting.
.
This is a special case of
.BR MC .
.
See
.B 1C
and
.BR NCOL .
.
.
.TP
.B AE
Abstract end;
stop collecting abstract text.
.
See
.BR AS .
.
.
.\" In DWB mm, the mnemonic for `AF` was "alternate first-page format",
.\" and was described in the context of the `A` and `E` registers and
.\" `}Z` and `]S` strings, none of which we support.
.TP
.BR AF \~[\c
.IR firm-name ]
Specify firm associated with the document.
.
At most one can be declared;
the firm name is used by memorandum types and available to cover sheets.
.
.B AF
terminates a document title started with
.BR TL ,
and can be called without an argument for that purpose.
.
See
.B MT
and
.BR COVER .
.
.
.TP
.BR AL \~[\c
.IR type \~[ text-indent \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]]
Begin an auto-incrementing numbered list.
.
Item numbers start at one.
.
The
.I type
argument assigns the register format
(see above)
of the list item enumerators.
.
The default
.RB is\~ 1 .
.
An explicitly empty
.I type
also indicates the default.
.
A
.I text-indent
argument overrides register
.BR Li .
.
A third argument suppresses the blank line that normally precedes each
list item.
.
Use
.B LI
to declare list items,
and
.B LE
to end the list.
.
.
.TP
.BR APP \~\c
.RI [ id\~ [ title ]]
Begin an appendix.
.
If the identifier
.I id
is omitted,
it is incremented
(or initialized,
if necessary).
.
The register format used for
.I id
is \[lq]A\[rq].
.
The page is broken.
.
The register
.B Aph
determines whether an appendix heading is then formatted.
.
This heading uses the string
.B App
followed by
.IR id .
.
Appendices appear in any table of contents
(see
.BR TC ).
.
The string
.B Apptxt
is set to
.I title
if the latter is present,
and made empty otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.BI APPSK\~ "id n" \~\c
.RI [ title ]
As
.BR APP ,
but increment the page number by
.IR n .
.
Use this macro to \[lq]skip pages\[rq] when diagrams or other materials
not formatted by
.I \%troff
are included in appendices.
.
.
.TP
.BR AS\~ [\c
.IR placement \~[ indentation ]]
Abstract start;
begin collecting abstract.
.
Input up to the next
.B AE
call is included in the abstract.
.
.I placement
influences the location of the abstract on the cover sheet of a
memorandum
(see
.BR MT ).
.
.BR \%COVER ,
by contrast,
ignores
.I placement
by default,
but can be customized to interpret it.
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
lf(BI) lb
l lx.
placement@Effect
0@T{
The abstract appears on page\~1 and cover sheet if the document is a
\[lq]released paper\[rq] memorandum
.RB (\[lq] ".MT 4" \[rq]);
otherwise,
it appears on page\~1 without a cover sheet.
T}
1@T{
The abstract appears only on the cover sheet
.RB (\[lq] ".MT 4" \[rq]
only).
T}
.\" XXX: This does not appear to be implemented.
.\"2@T{
.\"The abstract is printed only on the cover sheet (if not
.\".BR ".MT 4" )
.\".
.\"The cover sheet is printed without a need for \fBCS\fP.
.\"T}
.TE
.
.
.IP
An abstract does not appear at all in external letters
.RB (\[lq] ".MT 5" \[rq]).
.
.RI A\~ placement
of
.B 2
was supported by DWB
.I mm
but is not by
.IR "groff mm" .
.
.
.IP
A second argument increases the indentation by
.I indentation
and reduces the line length by twice this amount.
.
A scaling unit of ens is assumed.
.
The default is\~0.
.
.
.\" XXX: Do we need a macro for this?  Why is it not a string like App
.\" or Licon?  It is usefully localizable.
.TP
.BR AST \~\c
.RI [ caption ]
Set the caption above the abstract to
.IR caption ,
or clear it if there is no argument.
.
The default is \[lq]ABSTRACT\[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI AT\~ title\c
\~.\|.\|.
Specify author's title(s).
.
If present,
.B AT
must appear just after the corresponding author's
.BR AU .
.
Each
.I title
occupies an output line beneath the author's name in the signature block
used by
.B LT
letters
(see
.BR SG )
and in
.B MT
memoranda.
.
The
.B ms
cover sheet style also uses it.
.
.
.br
.ne 7v
.TP
.BR AU \~\c
.RI [ name\~\c
.RI [ initials\~\c
.RI [ loc\~\c
.RI [ dept\~\c
.RI [ ext\~\c
.RI [ room\~\c
.RI [ arg1\~\c
.RI [ arg2\~\c
.RI [ arg3 ]]]]]]]]]
Specify author.
.
.B AU
terminates a document title started with
.BR TL ,
and can be called without arguments for that purpose.
.
Author information is used by cover sheets,
.B MT
memoranda,
and
.BR SG .
.
Further arguments comprise
initials,
location,
department,
telephone extension,
room number or name,
and up to three additional items.
.
Repeat
.B AU
to identify multiple authors.
.
.
.IP
Use
.BR WA / WE
instead to identify the author for documents employing
.BR LT .
.
.
.TP
.BR AV \~[\c
.IR name \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]
Format approval lines for a handwritten signature and date.
.
Two horizontal rules are drawn,
with the specified
.I name
and the text of the string
.B Letdate
beneath them.
.
Above these rules,
the text in the string
.B Letapp
is formatted;
a second argument replaces this text with a blank line.
.
See
.BR LT .
.
.
.\" XXX: AVL is misnamed; it should have been called SGL or similar.
.TP
.BR AVL \~[\c
.IR name ]
As
.BR AV ,
but the date,
date rule,
and approval notation
.B Letapp
are omitted.
.
.
.TP
.BR B \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ bold-text\~\c
.RI [ previous-font-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I bold-text
in boldface with
.I previous-font-text
in the previous font,
without space between the arguments.
.
If no arguments,
switch font to bold style.
.
.
.TP
.B B1
Begin boxed,
kept display.
.
The text is indented one character,
and the right margin is one character shorter.
.
This is a GNU extension.
.
.
.TP
.B B2
End boxed,
kept display.
.
This is a GNU extension.
.
.
.TP
.B BE
End bottom block; see
.BR BS .
.
.
.TP
.BR BI \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ bold-text\~\c
.RI [ italic-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I bold-text
in boldface with
.I italic-text
in italics,
without space between the arguments.
.
.
.TP
.BR BL \~[\c
.IR text-indent \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]
Begin bulleted list.
.
Items are prefixed with a bullet and a space.
.
A
.I text-indent
argument overrides register
.BR Pi .
.
A second argument suppresses blank lines between items.
.
Use
.B LI
to declare list items,
and
.B LE
to end the list.
.
.
.TP
.BR BR \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ bold-text\~\c
.RI [ roman-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I bold-text
in boldface with
.I roman-text
in roman style,
without space between the arguments.
.
.
.TP
.B BS
Begin bottom block.
.
Input is collected until
.B BE
is called,
and output between the footnote area and footer of each page.
.
.
.\" XXX: Couldn't this have been done with an extra parameter to `VL`?
.\" Or a register influencing VL behavior?
.TP
.BR BVL \~[\c
.IR text-indent \~[ mark-indent \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]]
Begin broken variable-item
(or \[lq]tagged\[rq])
list.
.
Each item is expected to supply its own mark.
.
The line is always broken after the mark;
contrast
.BR VL .
.
.I text-indent
sets the indentation of the text,
and
.I mark-indent
the distance from the current list indentation to the mark.
.
A third argument suppresses the blank line that normally precedes each
list item.
.
Use
.B LI
to declare list items,
and
.B LE
to end the list.
.
.
.TP
.BR \%COVER \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ style ]
Begin a cover page description.
.
.B \%COVER
must appear before the body text
(or main matter)
of a document.
.
The argument
.I style
is used to construct the file name
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm/\: style \:.cov
and load it with the
.B mso
request.
.
The default
.I style
is
.BR ms ;
the
.I ms.cov
file prepares a cover page resembling those of the
.I ms
package.
.
A
.I .cov
file must define a
.B \%COVEND
macro,
which a document must call at the end of the cover description.
.
Use cover description macros in the following order;
only
.B TL
and
.B AU
are required.
.
.
.IP
.EX
\&.COVER
\&.TL
\&.AF
\&.AU
\&.AT
\&.AS
.ne 2v
\&.AE
\&.COVEND
.EE
.
.
.TP
.B COVEND
End the cover description.
.
.
.TP
.B DE
End static or floating display begun with
.B DS
or
.BR DF .
.
.
.TP
.BR DF\~ [\c
.IR format \~[ fill \~[ right-indentation ]]]
Begin floating display.
.
A floating display is saved in a queue and output in the order entered.
.
Arguments are handled as in
.BR DS .
.
Floating displays cannot be nested.
.
Placement of floating displays is controlled by the registers
.B De
and
.BR Df .
.
.
.TP
.BR DL \~[\c
.IR text-indent \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]
Begin dashed list.
.
Items are prefixed with an em dash and a space.
.
A
.I text-indent
argument overrides register
.BR Pi .
.
A second argument suppresses blank lines between items.
.
Use
.B LI
to declare list items,
and
.B LE
to end the list.
.
.
.TP
.BR DS \~[\c
.IR format \~[\c
.IR fill \~[\c
.IR right-indentation ]]]
Begin static display.
.
Input until
.B DE
is called is collected into a display.
.
The display is output on a single page unless it is taller than the
height of the page.
.
.B DS
can be nested
(contrast with
.BR DF ).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
L Lx.
format@Effect
\f[I]none\f[]@Do not indent the display.
L@Do not indent the display.
I@T{
Indent text by
.BR \[rs]n[Si] .
T}
C@Center each line.
CB@Center the whole display as a block.
R@Right-adjust the lines.
RB@Right-adjust the whole display as a block.
.TE
.
.
.IP
The values \[lq]L\[rq],
\[lq]I\[rq],
\[lq]C\[rq],
and \[lq]CB\[rq] can also be specified as \[lq]0\[rq],
\[lq]1\[rq],
\[lq]2\[rq],
and
\[lq]3\[rq],
respectively,
for compatibility with
.RI DWB\~ mm.
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
L Lx.
fill@Effect
\f[I]none\f[]@Disable filling.
N@Disable filling.
F@Enable filling.
.TE
.
.
.IP
\[lq]N\[rq] and \[lq]F\[rq] can also be specified as \[lq]0\[rq] and
\[lq]1\[rq],
respectively,
for compatibility with
.RI DWB\~ mm.
.
.
.IP
A third argument
reduces the line length by
.I right-indentation.
.
.
.IP
.I mm
normally
places blank lines before and after the display.
.
Set register
.B Ds
to\~0 to suppress these.
.
.
.TP
.BR EC \~\c
.RI [ title \~[ override \~[ flag \~[  refname ]]]]
Caption an equation.
.
The caption consists of the string
.B Liec
followed by an automatically incrementing counter stored in the register
.BR Ec ,
punctuation configured by the register
.BR Of ,
then
.I title
(if any).
.
Use the
.B af
request to configure
.BR Ec 's
number format.
.
.I override
and
.I flag
alter the equation number as follows.
.
Omitting
.I flag
and specifying
.B 0
in its place are equivalent.
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
L Lx.
flag@Effect
0@T{
Prefix number with
.IR override .
T}
1@T{
Suffix number with
.IR override .
T}
2@T{
Replace number with
.IR override .
T}
.TE
.
.
.IP
Equation captions are centered irrespective of the alignment of any
enclosing display.
.
.
.IP
.I refname
stores the equation number using
.BR SETR ;
it can be retreived with
.RB \[lq] .GETST
.IR refname \[rq].
.
This argument is a GNU extension.
.
.
.IP
Captioned equations are listed in a table of contents
(see
.BR TC )
if the Boolean register
.B Le
is true.
.
Such a list uses the string
.B Le
as a heading.
.
.
.TP
.BR EF\~ [ \[dq]\|\[aq]\c
.IB left \[aq] center \[aq] right \[aq]\|\[dq]\c
]
Define the even-page footer,
which is formatted just above the normal page footer on even-numbered
pages.
.
See
.BR PF .
.
.B EF
defines the string
.BR EOPef .
.
.
.TP
.BR EH\~ [ \[dq]\|\[aq]\c
.IB left \[aq] center \[aq] right \[aq]\|\[dq]\c
]
Define the even-page header,
which is formatted just below the normal page header on even-numbered
pages.
.
See
.BR PH .
.
.B EH
defines the string
.BR TPeh .
.
.
.TP
.B EN
End equation input preprocessed by
.MR \%eqn 1 ;
see
.BR EQ .
.
.
.TP
.B EOP
If defined,
this macro is called in lieu of normal page footer layout.
.
Headers and footers are formatted in a separate environment.
.
See
.BR TP .
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Cb S
Lb L.
Strings available to EOP
_
EOPf@argument to \fBPF\fP
EOPef@argument to \fBEF\fP
EOPof@argument to \fBOF\fP
.TE
.
.
.TP
.BI EPIC\  "\fR[\fP\fB\-L\fP\fR]\fP width height \fR[\fPname\fR]\fP"
Draw a box with the given
.I width
and
.IR height .
.
It also prints the text
.I name
or a default string if
.I name
is not specified.
.
This is used to include external pictures;
just give the size of the picture.
.
.B \-L
left-aligns the picture;
the default is to center.
.
See
.BR PIC .
.
.
.TP
.BR EQ \~[\c
.IR label ]
Start equation input preprocessed by
.MR \%eqn 1 .
.
.B EQ
and
.B EN
macro calls bracket an equation region.
.
Such regions must be contained in displays
.RB ( DS / DE ),
except when the region is used only to configure
.I \%eqn
and not to produce output.
.
If present,
.I label
appears aligned to the right and
centered vertically within the display;
see register
.BR Eq .
.
.
If multiple
.I eqn \" generic
regions occur within a display,
only the last
.I label
(if any)
is used.
.
.
.TP
.BR EX \~\c
.RI [ title \~[ override \~[ flag \~[  refname ]]]]
Caption an exhibit.
.
Arguments are handled analogously to
.BR EC .
.
The register
.B Ex
is the exhibit counter.
.
The string
.B Liex
precedes the exhibit number and any
.I title.
.
Exhibit captions are centered irrespective of the alignment of any
enclosing display.
.
.
.IP
Captioned exhibits are listed in a table of contents
(see
.BR TC )
if the Boolean register
.B Lx
is true.
.
Such a list uses the string
.B Lx
as a heading.
.
.
.TP
.BR FC \~[\c
.IR closing-text ]
Output the string
.BR Letfc ,
or the specified
.I closing-text,
as the formal closing of a letter.
.
.
.TP
.BR FD \~[\c
.IR arg \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]
Configure display of footnotes.
.
The first argument encodes enablement of
automatic hyphenation,
adjustment to the right margin,
indentation of footnote text,
and left- vs.\& right-alignment of the footnote label within the space
allocated for it.
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.IP
.\" XXX: We can fit one more row using "nokeep" vs. not using it.
.TS
tab(@) nokeep;
Lf(BI) Lb Lb Lb Lb
L L L L L.
arg@Hyphenate?@Adjust?@Indent?@Label alignment
0@no@yes@yes@left
1@yes@yes@yes@left
2@no@no@yes@left
3@yes@no@yes@left
4@no@yes@no@left
5@yes@yes@no@left
6@no@no@no@left
7@yes@no@no@left
8@no@yes@yes@right
9@yes@yes@yes@right
10@no@no@yes@right
11@yes@no@yes@right
.TE
.
.
.IP
An
.I arg
greater than 11 is treated
.RB as\~ 0 .
.
.IR mm 's
default
.RB is\~ 0 .
.
.
.IP
If a second argument,
conventionally
.BR 1 ,
is given,
footnote numbering is reset when a first-level heading is encountered.
.
See
.BR FS .
.
.
.TP
.B FE
End footnote;
see
.BR FS .
.
.
.TP
.BR FG \~\c
.RI [ title \~[ override \~[ flag \~[  refname ]]]]
Caption a figure.
.
Arguments are handled analogously to
.BR EC .
.
The register
.B Fg
is the figure counter.
.
The string
.B Lifg
precedes the figure number and any
.I title.
.
Figure captions are centered irrespective of the alignment of any
enclosing display.
.
.
.IP
Captioned figures are listed in a table of contents
(see
.BR TC )
if the Boolean register
.B Lf
is true.
.
Such a list uses the string
.B Lf
as a heading.
.
.
.TP
.BR FS \~[\c
.IR label ]
Start footnote.
.
Input until
.B FE
is called is collected into a footnote.
.
By default,
footnotes are automatically numbered starting at 1;
the number is available in register
.B :p
and,
with a trailing period,
in
.RB string\~ F .
.
This string precedes the footnote text at the bottom of the column or
page.
.
Footnotes are vertically separated by the product of
.RB registers\~ Fs
and
.BR Lsp .
.
In
.IR "groff mm" ,
footnotes may be used in displays.
.
.
.IP
A
.I label
argument replaces the contents of the string
.BR F ;
it need not be numeric.
.
In this event,
the footnote marker in the body text must be explicitly written.
.
.
.TP
.BI GETHN\  "refname \fR[\fPvarname\fR]\fP"
Include the heading number where the corresponding
.RB \[lq] .SETR
.IR refname \[rq]
was placed.
.
This is displayed as \[lq]X.X.X.\[rq] in pass\~1.
.
See
.BR INITR .
.
If
.I varname
is used,
.B GETHN
sets the string
.I varname
to the heading number.
.
.TP
.BI GETPN\  "refname \fR[\fPvarname\fR]\fP"
Include the page number where the corresponding
.RB \[lq] .SETR
.IR refname \[rq]
was placed.
.
This is displayed as \[lq]9999\[rq] in pass\~1.
.
See
.BR INITR .
.
If
.I varname
is used,
.B GETPN
sets the string
.I varname
to the page number.
.
.TP
.BI GETR\  refname
Combine
.B GETHN
and
.B GETPN
with the text \[lq]chapter\[rq] and \[lq],\~page\[rq].
.
The string
.B Qrf
contains the text for the cross reference:
.
.RS
.IP
\&.ds Qrf See chapter \[rs]\[rs]*[Qrfh], page \[rs]\[rs]*[Qrfp].
.RE
.
.IP
.B Qrf
may be changed to support other languages.
.
Strings
.B Qrfh
and
.B Qrfp
are set by
.B GETR
and contain the page and heading number,
respectively.
.
.TP
.BI GETST\  "refname \fR[\fPvarname\fR]\fP"
Include the string saved with the second argument to
.BR .SETR .
.
This is a dummy string in pass\~1.
.
If
.I varname
is used,
.B GETST
sets it to the saved string.
.
See
.BR INITR .
.
.
.TP
.BI H\~ level\~\c
.RI [ title \~[ suffix ]]
Set a numbered section heading at
.IR level .
.
.I mm
produces numbered
.I "heading marks"
of the form
.IR a . b . c .\|.\|.,
with up to fourteen levels of nesting.
.
Each level's number increases automatically with each
.B H
call and is reset to zero when a more significant
.I level
is specified.
.
.RB \[lq] 1 \[rq]\~is
the most significant or coarsest division of the document.
.
Text after an
.B H
call is formatted as a paragraph;
calling
.B P
is unnecessary.
.
.
.IP
.I title
specifies an optional title;
it must be double-quoted if it contains spaces.
.
.I mm
appends
.I suffix
to
.I title
in the body of the document,
but omits it from any table of contents
(see
.BR TC ).
.
This facility can be used to annotate the heading title with a footnote.
.
.I suffix
should not interpolate
.RB the\~ F
string;
specify a footnote mark explicitly.
.
See
.BR FS .
.
.
.IP
Heading behavior is highly configurable.
.
Several registers set a
.I threshold,
where heading levels at or below the threshold value are handled in one
way,
and those above it another.
.
For example,
a heading level within the threshold of register
.B Cl
is included in the table of contents
(see
.BR TC ).
.
.
.IP
.I Heading layout.
.
Register
.B Ej
sets a threshold for page breaking (ejection) prior to a heading.
.
If not preceded by a page break,
a heading level below the threshold in register
.B Hps
is preceded by the amount of vertical space in register
.BR Hps1 ,
and by the amount in
.B Hps2
otherwise.
.
The
.B Hb
register sets a threshold below which a break occurs after the heading,
and register
.B Hs
sets a threshold below which vertical space follows it.
.
If the heading level is not less than both of these,
a
.I run-in heading
is produced;
paragraph text follows on the same output line.
.
Otherwise,
register
.B Hi
configures the indentation of text after headings.
.
Threshold register
.B Hc
enables the centering of headings;
a heading level below both of the
.B Hb
and
.B Hc
thresholds is centered.
.
.
.IP
.I Heading typeface and size.
.
The fonts used for heading numbers and titles at each level are
configured by the
.B HF
string.
.
The string
.B HP
likewise assigns a type size to each heading level.
.
.\" XXX: Why not an "Hvs" string?
The vertical spacing used by headings may be controlled by
the user-definable macros
.B HX
and/or
.BR HZ .
.
.
.IP
.I Heading number format.
.
Registers named
.B H1
through
.B H14
store counters for each heading level.
.
Their values are printed using Arabic numerals by default;
see
.BR HM .
.
The heading levels are catenated with dots for formatting;
to typeset only the deepest,
set the
.B Ht
register.
.
Heading numbers are not suffixed with a trailing dot except when only
the first level is output;
to omit a dot in this case as well,
clear the
.B H1dot
register.
.
.
.IP
.I Customizing heading behavior.
.
.I mm
calls
.I hook
macros to enable further customization of headings.
.
(DWB
.I mm
called these \[lq]exits\[rq].)
.
They can be used to change the heading's
.I mark
(the numbered portion before any heading title),
its vertical spacing,
and its vertical space requirements
(for instance,
to require a minimum quantity of subsequent output lines).
.
Define hook macros in expectation of the following parameters.
.
The argument
.I declared-level
is the
.I level
argument to
.BR H ,
.RB or\~ 0
for unnumbered headings (see
.BR HU ).
.
.I actual-level
is the same as
.I declared-level
for numbered headings,
and the value of
.RB register\~ Hu
for unnumbered headings.
.
.I title
is the corresponding argument to
.B H
or
.BR HU .
.
.
.RS
.TP
.BI HX\~ "declared-level actual-level title"
.I mm
calls
.B HX
before setting the heading.
.
Your definition may alter
.BR }0 ,
.BR }2 ,
and
.BR ;3 .
.
.
.\" XXX: These names are ugly and of no obvious meaning.  Make
.\" documented aliases for them.
.RS
.TP
.BR }0\~ (string)
contains the heading mark plus two spaces if
.I declared-level
is non-zero,
and otherwise is empty.
.
.
.TP
.BR ;0\~ (register)
encodes a position for the text after the heading.
.
0\~means that the heading is to be run in,
1\~means that a break is to occur before the text,
and 2\~means that vertical space is to separate heading and text.
.
.
.TP
.BR }2\~ (string)
is the suffix that separates a run-in heading from the text.
.
It contains two spaces if register
.B ;0
is\~0,
and otherwise is empty.
.
.
.TP
.BR ;3\~ (register)
contains the vertical space required for the heading to be typeset.
.
If that amount is not available,
the page is broken prior to the heading.
.
The default is
.BR 2v .
.RE
.
.
.TP
.BI HY\~ "declared-level actual-level title"
.I mm
calls
.B HY
after determing the heading typeface and size.
.
It could be used to change indentation.
.
.
.TP
.BI HZ\~ "declared-level actual-level title"
.I mm
calls
.B HZ
after formatting the heading,
just before
.B H
or
.B HU
returns.
.
It could be used to change the page header to include a section heading.
.\" XXX: ...but only for the _next_ page, not the current one.  See
.\" Savannah #62825.
.RE
.
.
.TP
.BI HC\  \fR[\fPhyphenation-character\fR]\fP
Set hyphenation character.
.
Default value is \[lq]\[rs]%\[rq].
.
Resets to the default if called without argument.
.
Hyphenation can be turned off by setting register
.B Hy
to\~0 at the beginning of the file.
.
.
.TP
.BI HM\  "\fR[\fParg1 \fR[\fParg2 \fR[.\|.\|.\& [\fParg14\fR]]]]\fP"
Set the heading mark style.
.
Each argument assigns the specified register format
(see above)
to the corresponding heading level.
.
The default
.RB is\~ 1
for all levels.
.
An explicitly empty argument also indicates the default.
.
.
.TP
.BI HU\~ heading-text
Set an unnumbered section heading.
.
Except for a heading number,
it is treated as a numbered heading of the level stored in
.RB register\~ Hu ;
.RB see\~ H .
.
.
.TP
.BR I \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ italic-text\~\c
.RI [ previous-font-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I italic-text
in italics with
.I previous-font-text
in the previous font,
without space between the arguments.
.
If no arguments,
switch font to italic style.
.
.
.TP
.BR IA \~[\c
.IR recipient-name \~[\c
.IR title ]]
Specify the inside address in a letter.
.
Input is collected into the inside address until
.B IE
is called,
and then output.
.
You can specify multiple recipients with empty
.BR IA / IE
pairs;
only the last address is used.
.
The arguments give each recipient a name and title.
.
See
.BR LT .
.
.
.TP
.BR IB \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ italic-text\~\c
.RI [ bold-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I italic-text
in italics with
.I bold-text
in boldface,
without space between the arguments.
.
.
.TP
.B IE
End the inside address begun with
.BR IA .
.
.
.TP
.BI IND\~ argument\~\c
\&.\|.\|.
If the Boolean register
.B Ref
is true,
write an index entry as a specially prepared
.I roff
comment to the standard error stream,
with each
.I argument
separated from its predecessor by a tab character.
.
The entry's location information is arranged as configured by the most
recent
.B INITI
call.
.
.
.TP
.B INDP
Output the index set up by
.B INITI
and populated by
.B IND
calls.
.
By default,
.B INDP
calls
.B SK
and writes a centered caption interpolating the string
.BR Index .
.
It then disables filling and calls
.BR 2C ;
afterward,
it restores filling and calls
.BR 1C .
.
.
.IP
Define macros to customize this behavior.
.
.B INDP
calls
.B TXIND
before the caption,
.B TYIND
.I instead
of writing the caption,
and
.B TZIND
after formatting the index.
.
.
.TP
.BI INITI\~ "location-type file-name\~"\c
.RI [ macro ]
Initialize
.IR "groff mm" 's
indexing system.
.
Argument
.I location-type
selects how the location of each index entry is reported.
.
.I file-name
populates an internal string used later by
.BR INDP .
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
L Lx.
location-type@Entry format
N@page number
H@heading mark
B@page number, tab character, heading mark
.TE
.
.
.IP
If
.I macro
is specified,
it is called for each index entry
with the arguments given to
.BR IND .
.
.
.TP
.BI INITR\~ id
Initialize the cross reference macros.
.
Cross references are written to the standard error stream,
which should be redirected into a file named
.RI id .qrf .
.
.MR mmroff 1
handles this and the two formatting passes it requires.
.\".
.\"This program exists because
.\".MR groff 1
.\"by default deactivates the unsafe operations that are required by
.\".BR INITR .
.
The first pass identifies cross references,
and the second one includes them.
.\"
.\".B INITR
.\"can be used several times,
.\"but it is only the first occurrence of
.\".B INITR
.\"that is active.
.
.
.IP
See
.BR SETR ,
.BR GETPN ,
and
.BR GETHN .
.
.
.TP
.BR IR \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ italic-text\~\c
.RI [ roman-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I italic-text
in italics with
.I roman-text
in roman style,
without space between the arguments.
.
.
.TP
.BR ISODATE\~ [ 0 ]
Use ISO\~8601 format for the date string
.B DT
used by some cover sheet and memorandum types;
that is,
.IR YYYY - MM - DD .
.
Must be called before
.B ND
to be effective.
.
If given an argument
.RB of\~ 0,
the traditional date format for the
.I groff
locale is used;
this is also the default.
.
.
.TP
.BI LB\~ "text-indent mark-indent pad type"\~\c
.RI [ mark \~[ pre-item-space \~[ pre-list-space ]]]
Begin list.
.
The macros
.BR AL ,
.BR BL ,
.BR BVL ,
.BR DL ,
.BR ML ,
.BR RL ,
and
.B VL
call
.B LB
in various ways;
they are simpler to use and may be preferred if they suit the desired
purpose.
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.IP
The nesting level of lists is tracked by
.I mm;
the outermost level is\~0.
.
The text of each list item is indented by
.I text-indent;
the default is taken from the
.B Li
register
(in ens).
.
Each item's mark is indented by
.I mark-indent;
the default is
.BR 0n .
.
The mark is normally left-aligned.
.
If
.I pad
is greater than zero,
.I mark-indent
is overridden such that
.I pad
ens of space follow the mark.
.
.I type
selects one of six possible ways to display the mark.
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
L L.
type@Output for a mark \[lq]x\[rq]
1@x.
2@x)
3@(x)
4@[x]
5@<x>
6@{x}
.TE
.
.
.IP
If
.I type
is\~0 and
.I mark
is unspecified,
the items are set with a hanging indent.
.
Otherwise,
.I mark
is interpreted as a string defining the mark.
.
If
.I type
is greater than zero,
items are automatically numbered;
.I mark
is interpreted as a register format.
.
The default
.I type
.RB is\~ 0 .
.
.
.IP
The last two arguments manage vertical space.
.
Unless a list's nesting level is greater than the value of register
.BR Ls ,
its items are preceded by
.I pre-item-space
multiplied by the register
.BR Lsp ;
the default
.RB is\~ 1 .
.
.B LB
precedes the list by
.I pre-list-space
multiplied by the register
.BR Lsp ;
the default
.RB is\~ 0 .
.
.
.TP
.BR LC \~[\c
.IR list-level ]
Clear list state.
.
Active lists are terminated as if with
.BR LE ,
either all
(the default)
or only those from the current level down to
.I list-level
if specified.
.
.B H
calls
.B LC
automatically.
.
.
.TP
.BR LE \~[ 1 ]
End list.
.
The current list is terminated.
.
An argument
.RB of\~ 1
causes
vertical space in the amount of register
.B Lsp
to follow the list.
.
.
.TP
.BR LI \~[\c
.IR mark \~[ item-mark-mode ]]
Begin a list item.
.
Input is collected into a list item until the current list is terminated
or
.B LI
is called again.
.
By default,
the item's text is preceded by any mark configured by the current list.
.
If only
.I mark
is specified,
it replaces the configured mark.
.
A second argument
prefixes
.I mark
to the configured mark;
an
.I item-mark-mode
value of\~1 places an unbreakable space after
.I mark,
while
a value of\~2 does not
(rendering the two adjacent).
.
Also see register
.BR Limsp .
.
.
.TP
.BI LO\~ option\~\c
.RI [ value ]
Specify letter options;
see
.BR LT .
.
Standard options are as follows.
.
See
.B IA
regarding the inside address and string
.B DT
regarding the date.
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
L Lx.
option@Effect
AT@T{
Attention;
put contents of string
.B LetAT
and
.I value
left-aligned after the inside address.
T}
CN@T{
Confidential;
put
.I value,
or contents of string
.BR LetCN ,
left-aligned after the date.
T}
RN@T{
Reference;
put contents of string
.B LetRN
and
.I value
after the confidental notation
(if any)
and the date,
aligned with the latter.
T}
SA@T{
Salutation;
put
.I value,
or contents of string
.BR LetSA ,
left-aligned after the inside address
and the confidental notation
(if any).
T}
SJ@T{
Subject;
put contents of string
.B LetSJ
and
.I value
left-aligned after the inside address
and the attention and salutation notations
(if any).
.
In letter type \[lq]SP\[rq],
.B LetSJ
is ignored and
.I value
is set in full capitals.
T}
.TE
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.TP
.BR LT \~[\c
.IR style ]
Format a letter in the designated
.I style,
defaulting to
.B BL
(see below).
.
A letter begins with the writer's address
.RB ( WA / WE ),
followed by the date
.RB ( ND ),
the inside address
.RB ( IA / IE ),
the body of the letter
.RB ( P
and other general-purpose
.I mm
macros),
the formal closing
.RB ( FC ),
the signature
.RB ( SG ),
and notations
.RB ( NS / NE ).
.
Any of these may be omitted.
.
Letter options specified with
.B LO
add further annotations,
which are extensible;
see section \[lq]Internals\[rq] below.
.
.
.br
.ne 6v
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
Lb Lx.
style@Description
BL@T{
Blocked:
the writer's address,
date,
formal closing,
and signature are indented to the center of the line.
.
Everything else is left-aligned.
T}
SB@T{
Semi-blocked:
as
.BR BL ,
but the first line of each paragraph is indented by
.BR 5m .
.\" XXX: https://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?64315
T}
FB@T{
Fully blocked:
everything begins at the left margin.
T}
SP@T{
Simplified:
as
.BR FB ,
but a formal closing is omitted,
and the signature is set in full capitals.
T}
.TE
.
.
.TP
.BI MC\~ column-width\~\c
.RI [ gutter-width ]
Begin multi-column layout.
.
.I groff mm
creates as many columns of
.I column-width
as the line length will permit.
.
.I gutter-width
is the interior spacing between columns.
.
It defaults to
.IR column-width /15.
.
.B 1C
returns to single-column layout.
.
.B MC
is a GNU extension.
.
See
.B MULB
for an alternative.
.
.
.TP
.BI ML\~ "mark \fR[\fPtext-indent\~" \fR[\fP1\fR]]\fP
Start a list with the
.I mark
argument preceding each list item.
.
.I text-indent
overrides the default indentation of the list items set by register
.BR Li .
.
If a third argument,
conventionally
.BR 1 ,
is given,
the blank line that normally precedes each list item is suppressed.
.
Use
.B LI
to declare list items,
and
.B LE
to end the list.
.
.
.TP
.BR MT \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ type \~[ addressee ]]
Select memorandum type.
.
These correspond to formats used by AT&T Bell Laboratories,
where the
.I mm
package was initially developed,
affecting the document layout.
.
Some of these included a cover page with a caption categorizing the
document.
.
.I groff mm
uses
.I type
to construct the file name
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm/\:\% type \:.MT
and load it with the
.B mso
request.
.
Memorandum types 0 to\~5 are supported;
any other value of
.I type
is mapped to type\~6.
.
If
.I type
is omitted,
.B 0
is implied.
.
.I addressee
sets a string analogous to one used by AT&T cover sheet macros that are
not implemented in
.IR "groff mm" .
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
L L.
type@Description
0@normal memorandum; no caption
1@captioned \[lq]MEMORANDUM FOR FILE\[rq]
2@captioned \[lq]PROGRAMMER'S NOTES\[rq]
3@captioned \[lq]ENGINEER'S NOTES\[rq]
4@released paper
5@external letter
.TE
.
.
.IP
See
.B \%COVER
for a more flexible cover sheet mechanism.
.
.
.TP
.BI MOVE\  "y-pos \fR[\fPx-pos \fR[\fPline-length\fR]]\fP"
Move to a position, setting page offset to
.IR x-pos .
.
If
.I line-length
is not given, the difference between current and new page offset is
used.
.
Use
.B PGFORM
without arguments to return to normal.
.
.
.TP
.BR MULB \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.IR "cw1 space1\~" [ "cw2 space2" "] .\|.\|.\~" cwn
Begin alternative multi-column mode.
.
All column widths must be specified,
as must the amount of space between each column pair.
.
The arguments' default scaling unit is
.BR n .
.
.B MULB
uses a diversion and operates in a separate environment.
.
.
.TP
.B MULN
Begin next column in alternative column mode.
.
.
.TP
.B MULE
End alternative multi-column mode and emit the columns.
.
.
.TP
.B NCOL
Move to the start of the next column
(only when using
.B 2C
or
.BR MC ).
.
Contrast with
.BR MULN .
.
.
.TP
.BR ND \~[\c
.IR arg ]
Set the document's date.
.
.I mm
does not interpret
.IR arg ;
it can be a revision identifier
(or empty).
.
.
.TP
.B NE
End notation begun with
.BR NS ;
filling is enabled.
.
.
.TP
.BI nP\  \fR[\fPtype\fR]\fP
Begin a numbered paragraph at heading level two.
.
See
.BR P .
.
.
.br
.ne 6v
.TP
.BR NS \~[\c
.IR code \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]
Declare notations,
typically for letters or memoranda,
of the type specified by
.IR code .
.
The text corresponding to
.I code
is output,
and filling is disabled
until
.B NE
is called.
.
Typically,
a list of names or attachments lies within
.BR NS / NE .
.
If
.I code
is absent or does not match one of the values listed under the
.B Letns
string description below,
each line of notations is formatted as
.RI "\[lq]Copy (" line ") to\[rq]."
.
If a second argument,
conventionally
.BR 1 ,
is given,
.I code
becomes the entire notation and
.B NE
is not necessary.
.
In
.IR "groff mm" ,
you can set up further notations to be recognized by
.BR NS ;
see the strings
.B Letns
and
.B Letnsdef
below.
.
.
.TP
.BR OF\~ [ \[dq]\|\[aq]\c
.IB left \[aq] center \[aq] right \[aq]\|\[dq]\c
]
Define the odd-page footer,
which is formatted just above the normal page footer on odd-numbered
pages.
.
See
.BR PF .
.
.B OF
defines the string
.BR EOPof .
.
.
.TP
.BR OH\~ [ \[dq]\|\[aq]\c
.IB left \[aq] center \[aq] right \[aq]\|\[dq]\c
]
Define the odd-page header,
which is formatted just below the normal page header on odd-numbered
pages.
.
See
.BR PH .
.
.B OH
defines the string
.BR TPoh .
.
.
.TP
.B OP
Make sure that the following text is printed at the top of an
odd-numbered page.
.
Does not output an empty page if currently at the top of an odd page.
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.TP
.BR P \~[\c
.IR type ]
Begin new paragraph.
.
If
.I type
is missing or\~ 0,
.BR P \~sets
the paragraph fully left\-aligned.
.
A
.I type
of\~1
idents the first line by
.B \[rs][Pi]
ens.
.
Set the register
.B Pt
to select a default paragraph indentation style.
.
The register
.B Ps
controls the vertical spacing between paragraphs.
.
.
.TP
.B PE
Picture end;
see
.MR \%pic 1 .
.
.
.TP
.BR PF\~ [ \[dq]\|\[aq]\c
.IB left \[aq] center \[aq] right \[aq]\|\[dq]\c
]
Define the page footer.
.
The footer is formatted at the bottom of each page;
the argument is otherwise as described in
.BR PH .
.
.B PF
defines the string
.BR EOPf .
.
See
.BR EF ,
.BR OF ,
and
.BR EOP .
.
.TP
.BI PGFORM\  "\fR[\fPlinelength \fR[\fPpagelength \fR[\fPpageoffset\ " \fR[\fP1\fR]]]]\fP
Set line length, page length, and/or page offset.
.
This macro can be used for letterheads and similar.
.
It is normally the first macro call in a file,
though it is not necessary.
.
.B PGFORM
can be used without arguments to reset everything after a
.B MOVE
call.
.
A line break is done unless the fourth argument is given.
.
This can be used to avoid the page number on the first page
while setting new width and length.
.
(It seems as if this macro sometimes doesn't work too well.
.
Use the command-line arguments to change
line length, page length, and page offset instead.)
.
.TP
.B PGNH
Suppress header on the next page.
.
This macro must be called before any macros that produce output to
affect the layout of the first page.
.
.
.TP
.BR PH\~ [ \[dq]\|\[aq]\c
.IB left \[aq] center \[aq] right \[aq]\|\[dq]\c
]
.RS
Define the page header,
formatted at the top of each page,
as the argument,
where
.IR left ,
.IR center ,
and
.I right
are aligned to the respective locations on the line.
.
A
.RB \[lq] % \[rq]
character in
.I arg
is replaced by the page number.
.
If the argument is absent,
no page header is set.
.
The default page header is
.
.RS
.EX
\[dq]\[aq]\[aq]\- % \-\[aq]\[aq]\[dq]
.EE
.RE
.
which centers the page number between hyphens and formats nothing at the
upper left and right.
.
Header macros call
.B PX
(if defined)
after formatting the header.
.
.B PH
defines the string
.BR TPh .
.
See
.BR EH ,
.BR OH ,
and
.BR TP .
.RE
.
.
.TP
.BR PIC \~\c
.RB [ \-B ]\~\c
.RB [ \-C |\c
.BI \-I\~ n\c
.RB | \-L \c
.RB | \-R ]\~\c
.IR file \~[ width \~[ height ]]
Include PostScript document
.IR file .
.
The optional
.B \-B
argument draws a box around the picture.
.
The optional
.BR \-L ,
.BR \-C ,
.BR \-R ,
and
.BI \-I\~ n
arguments align the picture or indent it by
.I n
(assuming a scaling unit of
.BR m ).
.
By default,
the picture is left-aligned.
.
Optional
.I width
and
.I height
arguments resize the picture.
.
Use of this macro requires two-pass processing;
see
.B INITR
and
.MR mmroff 1 .
.
.
.TP
.B PS
Picture start; see
.MR \%pic 1 .
.
.
.TP
.B PY
Picture end with flyback.
.
Ends a
.MR \%pic 1
picture,
returning the vertical position to where it was prior to the picture.
.
This is a GNU extension.
.
.
.TP
.BR R \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ roman-text\~\c
.RI [ previous-font-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I roman-text
in roman style with
.I previous-font-text
in the previous font,
without space between the arguments.
.
If no arguments,
switch font to roman style.
.
.
.TP
.BR RB \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ roman-text\~\c
.RI [ bold-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I roman-text
in roman style with
.I bold-text
in boldface,
without space between the arguments.
.
.
.TP
.BI RD\  "\fR[\fPprompt \fR[\fPdiversion \fR[\fPstring\fR]]]\fP"
Read from standard input to diversion and/or string.
.
The text is saved in a diversion named
.IR diversion .
.
Recall the text by writing the name of the diversion after a dot
on an empty line.
.
A string is also defined if
.I string
is given.
.
.I Diversion
and/or
.I prompt
can be empty (\[dq]\[dq]).
.
.TP
.B RF
Reference end.
.
Ends a reference definition and returns to normal processing.
.
See
.BR RS .
.
.
.TP
.BR RI \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ roman-text\~\c
.RI [ italic-text ]]\~.\|.\|.
Join
.I roman-text
in roman style with
.I italic-text
in italics,
without space between the arguments.
.
.
.TP
.BR RL \~[\c
.IR text-indent \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]
Begin reference list.
.
Each item is preceded by an automatically incremented number between
square brackets;
compare
.BR AL .
.
.I text-indent
changes the default indentation.
.
Use
.B LI
to declare list items,
and
.B LE
to end the list.
.
A second argument,
conventionally
.BR 1 ,
suppresses the blank line that normally precedes each list item.
.
.
.TP
.BR RP \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ suppress-counter-reset \~[ page-ejection-policy ]]
Format a reference page,
listing items accumulated within
.BR RS / RF
pairs.
.
The reference counter is reset unless the first argument
.RB is\~ 1 .
.
Normally,
page breaks occur before and after the references are output;
the register
.B Rpe
configures this behavior,
and a second argument overrides its value.
.
.B TC
calls
.B RP
automatically if references have accumulated.
.
.
.IP
References are list items,
and thus are vertically separated
(see
.BR LB ).
.
Setting register
.B Ls
.RB to\~ 0
suppresses this spacing.
.
The string
.B Rp
contains the reference page caption.
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.TP
.BR RS \~[\c
.IR reference-string ]
Begin an automatically numbered reference definition.
.
By default,
references are numbered starting at 1;
the number is available in register
.BR :R .
.
Interpolate the string
.B Rf
where the reference mark should be and write the reference between
.BR RS / RF
on an input line after the reference mark.
.
If
.I reference-string
is specified,
.I "groff ms"
also stores the reference mark in a string of that name,
which can be interpolated as
.BI \[rs]*[ reference-string ]
subsequently.
.
.
.TP
.BR S \~[\c
.IR type-size \~[ vertical-spacing ]]
Set type size and vertical spacing.
.
Each argument is a
.I groff
measurement,
using an appropriate scaling unit and an optional
.B +
or
.B \-
prefix to increment or decrement the current value.
.
An argument of
.B P
restores the previous value,
.B C
indicates the current value,
and
.B D
requests the default.
.
An empty or omitted argument is treated as
.BR P .
.
.
.TP
.BR SA \~\c
.RI [ mode ]
Set or restore the default enablement of adjustment.
.
Specify
.B 0
or
.B 1
as
.I mode
to set a document's default explicitly;
.B 1
is assumed by
.IR mm .
.
Adjustment can be temporarily suspended with the
.B na
request.
.
When the
.B H
or
.B HU
macros are used to format a heading,
or when
.B SA
is called without a
.I mode
argument,
the default adjustment is restored.
.
.
.TP
.BI SETR\  "refname \fR[\fPstring\fR]\fP"
Remember the current heading and page numbers as
.IR refname .
.
Saves
.I string
if
.I string
is defined.
.
.I string
is retrieved with
.BR GETST .
.
See
.BR INITR .
.
.TP
.BI SG\  \fR[\fParg\  \fR[\fP1\fR]]\fP
Signature line.
.
Prints the authors name(s) after the formal closing.
.
The argument is appended to the reference data, printed at either the
first or last author.
.
The reference data is the location, department, and initials specified
with
.BR AU .
.
It is printed at the first author if the second argument is given,
otherwise at the last.
.
No reference data is printed if the author(s) is specified through
.BR WA / WE .
.
See section \[lq]Internals\[rq] below.
.
.
.TP
.BR SK \~\c
.RI [ n ]
Skip
.I n
pages.
.
If
.I n
is\~0 or omitted,
the page is broken unless the drawing position is already at the top of
a page.
.
Otherwise,
.I n
pages,
blank except for any headers and footers,
are printed.
.
.
.br
.ne 4v \" XXX: 3v should suffice
.TP
.BI SM\~ text\~\c
.RI [ post ]
.TQ
.BI SM\~ "pre text post"
Format
.I text
at a smaller type size,
joined with any specified
.I pre
and
.I post
at normal size.
.
.
.TP
.BI SP\  \fR[\fPlines\fR]\fP
Space vertically.
.
.I lines
can have any scaling factor,
like \[lq]3i\[rq] or \[lq]8v\[rq].
.
Several
.B SP
calls in a line only produces the maximum number of lines, not the sum.
.
.B SP
is ignored also until the first text line in a page.
.
Add
.B \[rs]&
before a call to
.B SP
to avoid this.
.
.
.TP
.B TAB
Reset tab stops to every 5\~ens.
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.TP
.BR TB \~\c
.RI [ title \~[ override \~[ flag \~[  refname ]]]]
Caption a table.
.
Arguments are handled analogously to
.BR EC .
.
The register
.B Tb
is the table counter.
.
The string
.B Litb
precedes the table number and any
.I title.
.
Table captions are centered irrespective of the alignment of any
enclosing display.
.
.
.IP
Captioned tables are listed in a table of contents
(see
.BR TC )
if the Boolean register
.B Lt
is true.
.
Such a list uses the string
.B Lt
as a heading.
.
.
.TP
.BR TC \~\c
.RI [ slevel\~\c
.RI [ spacing\~\c
.RI [ tlevel\~\c
.RI [ tab\~\c
.RI [ h1\~\c
.RI [ h2\~\c
.RI [ h3\~\c
.RI [ h4\~\c
.RI [ h5 ]]]]]]]]]
Output table of contents.
.
This macro is normally the last called in the document.
.
It flushes any pending displays and,
if any references are pending
(see
.BR RS ),
calls
.BR RP .
.
It then begins a new page with the contents caption,
stored in the string
.BR Licon ,
centered at the top.
.
The entries follow after three vees of space.
.
Each entry is a
saved section
(number and)
heading title
(see the
.B Cl
register),
along with its associated page number.
.
By default,
an entry is indented by an amount corresponding to its heading level
and the maximum heading length encountered at that heading level;
if defined,
the string
.B Ci
overrides these indentations.
.
Entries at heading levels up to and including
.I slevel
are preceded by
.I spacing
vees of space.
.
Entries at heading levels up to and including
.I tlevel
are followed by a leader and a right-aligned page number.
.
If the Boolean-valued
.I tab
argument is true,
the leader is replaced with horizontal motion in the same amount.
.
For entries above heading level
.IR tlevel ,
the page number follows the heading text after a word space.
.
Each argument
.IR h1 .\|.\|. h5
appears in order on its own line,
centered,
above the contents caption.
.
Page numbering restarts at 1,
in register format \[lq]i\[rq].
.
If the
.B Oc
register is true,
numbering of these pages is suppressed.
.
.
.IP
If
.B TC
is called with at most four arguments,
it calls the user-defined macro
.B TX
(if defined)
prior to formatting the contents caption,
and
.B TY
(if defined)
.I instead
of formatting the contents caption.
.
.
.IP
Analogous handling of lists of figures,
tables,
equations,
and exhibits is achieved by defining
.BI TX xx
and
.BI TY xx
macros,
where
.I xx
is \[lq]FG\[rq],
\[lq]TB\[rq],
\[lq]EC\[rq],
or \[lq]EX\[rq],
respectively.
.
Similarly,
the strings
.BR Lifg ,
.BR Litb ,
.BR Liex ,
and
.B Liec
determine captions for their respective lists.
.
.
.TP
.B TE
Table end.
.
See
.BR TS .
.
.TP
.B TH
End table heading.
.
It is repeated after page breaks within a table.
.
See
.BR TS .
.
The
.B N
argument supported by DWB
.I mm
is not implemented by
.I "groff mm."
.
.
.TP
.BR TL \~[\c
.IR charging-case-number \~[\c
.IR filing-case-number ]]
Begin document title.
.
Input is collected into the title until
.B AF
or
.B AU
is called,
and output as directed by the cover page.
.
.I charging-case-number
and
.I filing-case-number
are saved for use in memorandum types 0 and 5.
.
See
.BR MT .
.
.
.TP
.BI TM\~ number\c
\~.\|.\|.
Declare technical memorandum number(s) used by
.BR MT .
.
.
.br
.ne 6v
.TP
.B TP
If defined,
this macro is called in lieu of normal page header layout.
.
Headers and footers are formatted in a separate environment.
.
See
.BR EOP .
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Cb S
Lb L.
Strings available to TP
_
TPh@argument to \fBPH\fP
TPeh@argument to \fBEH\fP
TPoh@argument to \fBOH\fP
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B TS \fR[\fPH\fR]\fP
Table start.
.
Argument \[lq]H\[rq] tells
.I mm
that the table has a heading.
.
See
.BR TE ,
.BR TH ,
and
.MR \%tbl 1 .
.
.
.TP
.BR VERBON \~\c \" space in roman; we must use 2-font macro with \c
.RI [ format \~[ type-size \~[ font ]]]
Begin verbatim display,
where characters have equal width.
.
.I format
controls several parameters.
.
Add up the values of desired features;
the default
.RB is\~ 0 .
.
On typesetting devices,
further arguments configure the
.I type-size
in scaled points,
and the face
.RI ( font );
the default is
.B CR
(Courier roman).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
lb lb
l lx.
Value@Effect
1@Disable the formatter's escape character (\[rs]).
2@Vertically space before the display.
4@Vertically space after the display.
8@T{
Number output lines; call formatter's
.B nm
request with arguments in string
.BR Verbnm .
T}
16@T{
Indent by the amount stored in register
.BR Verbin .
T}
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B VERBOFF
End verbatim display.
.
.
.TP
.BR VL \~[\c
.IR text-indent \~[ mark-indent \~[\c
.BR 1 ]]]
Begin variable-item
(or \[lq]tagged\[rq])
list.
.
Each item should supply its own mark,
or tag.
.
If the mark is wider than
.I mark-indent,
one space separates it from subsequent text;
contrast
.BR BVL .
.
.I text-indent
sets the indentation of the text,
and
.I mark-indent
the distance from the current list indentation to the mark.
.
A third argument suppresses the blank line that normally precedes each
list item.
.
Use
.B LI
to declare list items,
and
.B LE
to end the list.
.
.
.TP
.BI "VM \fR[\fP\-T\fR] [\fP" "top \fR[\fPbottom\fR]]\fP"
Vertical margin.
.
Increase the top and bottom margin by
.I top
and
.IR bottom ,
respectively.
.
If option
.B \-T
is specified, set those margins to
.I top
and
.IR bottom .
.
If no argument is given, reset the margin to zero, or to the default
(\[lq]7v 5v\[rq])
if
.B \-T
is used.
.
It is highly recommended that macros
.B TP
and/or
.B EOP
are defined if using
.B \-T
and setting top and/or bottom margin to less than the default.
.
This undocumented DWB
.I mm
macro is exposed by
.I groff mm
to increase user control of page layout.
.
.
.TP
.BR WA \~[\c
.IR writer's-name \~[\c
.IR title ]]
Specify the writer(s) of an
.B LT
letter.
.
Input is collected into the writer's address until
.B WA
is called,
and then output.
.
You can specify multiple writers with empty
.BR WA / WE
pairs;
only the last address is used.
.
The arguments give each writer a name and title.
.
.
.TP
.BR WC \~[\c
.IR format \~.\|.\|.]
Control width of footnotes and displays.
.
.
.IP
.RS
.TS
tab(@);
Lf(BI) Lb
Lb Lx.
format@Effect
N@T{
equivalent to
.RB \[lq] "\-WF \-FF \-WD" \[rq]
.\" FB \" XXX: see Savannah ticket reference below
(default)
T}
WF@T{
set footnotes at full line length,
even in two-column mode
.\" XXX: what about multi-column modes more generally?
T}
\-WF@T{
set footnotes using column line length
T}
FF@T{
apply width of first footnote to encountered to subsequent ones
T}
\-FF@T{
footnote width determined by
.B WF
and
.B \-WF
T}
WD@T{
set displays at full line length,
even in two-column mode
.\" XXX: what about multi-column modes more generally?
T}
\-WD@T{
set displays using column line length
T}
.TE
.RE
.\" XXX: See <https://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?64316>.
.\"FB@T{
.\"Break when outputting floating displays.
.\"T}
.\"\-FB@T{
.\"Do not break when outputting floating displays.
.\"T}
.
.
.TP
.B WE
End the writer's address begun with
.BR WA .
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Strings
.\" ====================================================================
.
Many
.I mm
strings interpolate predefined,
localizable text.
.
These are presented in quotation marks.
.
.
.TP
.B App
\[lq]APPENDIX\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Apptxt
stores the
.I title
argument to the last
.B APP
call.
.
.
.TP
.B BU
interpolates a bullet
(see
.BR BL ).
.
.
.TP
.B Ci
is a list of indentation amounts to use for table of contents heading
levels,
overriding their automatic computation.
.
Each word must be a horizontal measurement
(like
.RB \[lq] 1i \[rq])
and is mapped one-to-one to heading levels 1,
2,
and so on.
.
.
.TP
.B DT
The date;
set by the
.B ND
macro
(defaults to the date the document is formatted).
.
The format is the conventional one for the
.I groff
locale,
but see the
.B ISODATE
macro and
.B Iso
register.
.
.
.TP
.B EM
interpolates an em dash.
.
.
.TP
.B F
interpolates an automatically numbered footnote marker;
the number is used by the next
.B FS
call without an argument.
.
In
.I troff
mode,
the marker is superscripted;
in
.I nroff
mode,
it is surrounded by square brackets.
.
.
.TP
.B H1txt
Updated by
.B .H
and
.B .HU
to the current heading text.
.
Also updated in table of contents & friends.
.
.
.TP
.B HF
assigns font identifiers,
separated by spaces,
to heading levels in one-to-one correspondence.
.
Each identifier may be a font mounting position,
font name,
or style name.
.
Omitted values are assumed to be\~1.
.
The default is
.RB \[lq] "2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2" \[rq],
which places all headings in italics.
.
DWB
.IR mm 's
default was
.RB \[lq] "3 3 2 2 2 2 2" \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B HP
assigns type sizes,
separated by spaces,
to heading levels in one-to-one correspondence.
.
Each size is interpreted in scaled points;
zero values are translated to
.BR 10 .
.
Omitted values are assumed to be\~0
(and are translated accordingly).
.
The default is
.RB \[lq] "0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0" \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B Index
\[lq]INDEX\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Le
\[lq]LIST OF EQUATIONS\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Letfc
\[lq]Yours very truly,\[rq]
(see
.BR FC )
.
.
.TP
.B Letapp
\[lq]APPROVED:\[rq]
(see
.BR AV )
.
.
.TP
.B LetAT
\[lq]ATTENTION:\[rq]
(see
.BR LO )
.
.
.TP
.B LetCN
\[lq]CONFIDENTIAL\[rq]
(see
.BR LO )
.
.
.TP
.B Letdate
\[lq]Date\[rq]
(see
.BR AV )
.
.
.TP
.B Letns
is a group of strings structuring the notations produced by
.BR NS .
.
If the
.I code
argument to
.B NS
has no corresponding string,
the notation is included between parentheses,
prefixed with
.BR Letns!copy ,
and suffixed with
.BR Letns!to .
.
Observe the spaces after \[lq]Copy\[rq] and before \[lq]to\[rq].
.
.
.RS
.P
.TS
tab(@);
Lb Lb Lb
L L L.
NS code@String@Contents
0@Letns!0@Copy to
1@Letns!1@Copy (with att.\&) to
2@Letns!2@Copy (without att.\&) to
3@Letns!3@Att.
4@Letns!4@Atts.
5@Letns!5@Enc.
6@Letns!6@Encs.
7@Letns!7@Under separate cover
8@Letns!8@Letter to
9@Letns!9@Memorandum to
10@Letns!10@Copy (with atts.\&) to
11@Letns!11@Copy (without atts.\&) to
12@Letns!12@Abstract Only to
13@Letns!13@Complete Memorandum to
14@Letns!14@CC
\[em]@Letns!copy@Copy \fI(with trailing space)\fP
\[em]@Letns!to@ to \fI(note leading space)\fP
.TE
.RE
.
.
.TP
.B Letnsdef
Select the notation format used by
.B NS
when it is given no argument.
.
The default is
.RB \[lq] 0 \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B LetRN
\[lq]In reference to:\[rq]
(see
.BR LO )
.
.
.TP
.B LetSA
\[lq]To Whom It May Concern:\[rq]
(see
.BR LO )
.
.
.TP
.B LetSJ
\[lq]SUBJECT:\[rq]
(see
.BR LO )
.
.
.TP
.B Lf
\[lq]LIST OF FIGURES\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Licon
\[lq]CONTENTS\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Liec
\[lq]Equation\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Liex
\[lq]Exhibit\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Lifg
\[lq]Figure\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Litb
\[lq]TABLE\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Lt
\[lq]LIST OF TABLES\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Lx
\[lq]LIST OF EXHIBITS\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.BR MO1 \|.\|.\|.\| MO12
\[lq]January\[rq] through \[lq]December\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Qrf
\[lq]See chapter \[rs]\[rs]*[Qrfh],
page \[rs]\[rs]n[Qrfp].\[rq]
.
.
.TP
.B Rf
interpolates an automatically numbered reference mark;
the number is used by the next
.B RS
call.
.
In
.I troff
mode,
the marker is superscripted;
in
.I nroff
mode,
it is surrounded by square brackets.
.
.
.TP
.B Rp
\[lq]REFERENCES\[rq]
.
.
.
.TP
.B Sm
interpolates
.if c \[u2120] \[u2120],
the service mark sign.
.
.
.TP
.B Tcst
interpolates an indicator of the
.B TC
macro's processing status.
.
If
.B TC
is not operating,
it is empty.
.
User-defined
.B TP
or
.B EOP
macros might condition page headers or footers on its contents.
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
lb lb
l l.
Value@Meaning
co@Table of contents
fg@List of figures
tb@List of tables
ec@List of equations
ex@List of exhibits
ap@Appendix
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B Tm
interpolates
.if c \[tm] \[tm],
the trade mark sign.
.
.
.TP
.B Verbnm
supplies argument(s) to the
.B nm
request employed by the
.B VERBON
macro.
.
The default is\~\[lq]1\[rq].
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Registers
.\" ====================================================================
.
Default register values,
where meaningful,
are shown in parentheses.
.
Many are also marked as Boolean-valued,
meaning that they are considered \[lq]true\[rq]
(on,
enabled)
when they have a positive value,
and \[lq]false\[rq]
(off,
disabled)
otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B .mgm
indicates that
.I groff mm
is in use
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B :p
is an auto-incrementing footnote counter;
see
.BR FS .
.
.
.TP
.B :R
is an auto-incrementing reference counter;
see
.BR RS .
.
.
.TP
.B Aph
formats an appendix heading
(and title,
if supplied);
see
.B APP
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Au
includes supplemental author information
(the third and subsequent arguments to
.BR AU )
in memorandum \[lq]from\[rq] information;
see
.B COVER
and
.B MT
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Cl
sets the threshold for inclusion of headings in a table of contents.
.
Headings at levels above this value are excluded;
see
.B H
and
.B TC
.RB ( 2 ).
.
The
.B Cl
register controls whether a heading is
.I saved
for output in the table of contents at the time
.B H
or
.B HU
is called;
if you change
.BR Cl 's
value immediately prior to calling
.BR TC ,
you are unlikely to get the result you want.
.
.
.TP
.B Cp
suppresses page breaks before lists of captioned
equations,
exhibits,
figures,
and tables,
and before an index;
see
.BR EC ,
.BR EX ,
.BR FG ,
.BR TB ,
and
.B INDP
(Boolean-valued;
.\" DWB 3.3's manual said this was 1, but the code said 0.
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B D
produces debugging information for the
.I mm
package on the standard error stream.
.
A value of\~0 outputs nothing;
1\~reports formatting progress.
.
Higher values communicate internal state information of increasing
verbosity
.RB ( 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B De
causes a page break after a floating display is output;
see
.B DF
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Df
configures the behavior of
.BR DF .
.
The following values are recognized;
4 and 5 do not override the
.B De
register
.RB ( 5 ).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lb Lb
L Lx.
Value@Effect
0@T{
Flush pending displays
at the end of each section
when section-page numbering is active,
otherwise at the end of the document.
T}
1@T{
Flush a pending display
on the current page or column
if there is enough space,
otherwise at the end of the document.
T}
2@T{
Flush one pending display
at the top of each page or column.
T}
3@T{
Flush a pending display
on the current page or column
if there is enough space,
otherwise at the top of the next.
T}
4@T{
Flush as many pending displays
as possible in a new page or column.
T}
5@T{
Fill columns or pages with flushed displays
until none remain.
T}
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B Ds
puts vertical space in the amount of register
.B Dsp
(if defined) or
.B Lsp
before and after each static display;
see
.B DS
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Dsp
configures the amount of vertical space placed
before and after static displays;
see
.B DS
and register
.B Ds
.RI ( undefined ).
.
.
.TP
.B Ec
is an auto-incrementing equation counter;
see
.BR EC .
.
.
.TP
.B Ej
sets the threshold for page breaks (ejection) prior to the format of
headings.
.
Headings at levels above this value are set on the same page and column
if possible;
see
.B H
.RB ( 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Eq
aligns an equation label to the left of a display instead of the right
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Ex
is an auto-incrementing exhibit counter;
see
.BR EX .
.
.
.TP
.B Fg
is an auto-incrementing figure counter;
see
.BR FG .
.
.
.TP
.B Fs
is multiplied by register
.B Lsp
to vertically separate footnotes;
see
.B FS
.RB ( 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.BR H1 \|.\|.\|.\| H14
are auto-incrementing counters corresponding to each heading level;
see
.BR H .
.
.
.\" XXX: This could be generalized to an "Hdot" threshold register with
.\" a default of 2.
.TP
.B H1dot
appends a period to the number of a level one heading;
see
.B H
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 1 ).
.
.
.\" XXX: This may be insufficiently general; see Savannah #62825.
.TP
.B H1h
is a copy of
A copy of register
.RB register\~ H1 ,
but it is incremented just before a page break.
.
This can be useful in user-defined macros;
see
.B H
and
.BR HX .
.
.
.TP
.B Hb
sets the threshold for breaking the line after formatting a heading.
.
Text after headings at levels above this value are set on the same
output line if possible;
see
.B H
.RB ( 2 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Hc
sets the threshold for centering a heading.
.
Headings at levels above this value use the prevailing alignment
(that is,
they are not centered);
see
.B H
.RB ( 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Hi
configures the indentation of text after headings.
.
It does not affect \[lq]run-in\[rq] headings.
.
The following values are recognized;
see
.B H
and
.B P
.RB ( 1 ).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lb Lb
L Lx.
Value@Effect
0@no indentation
1@indent per the paragraph type
2@indent to align with heading title
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B Hps
sets the heading level threshold for application of preceding vertical
space;
see
.BR H .
.
Headings at levels above the value in register
.B Hps
use the amount of space in register
.BR Hps1 ;
otherwise that in
.BR Hps2 .
.
The value of
.B Hps
should be strictly greater than that of
.B Ej
.RB ( 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Hps1
configures the amount of vertical space preceding a heading above the
.B Hps
threshold;
see
.B H
.RI ( troff
devices:
.BR 0.5v ;
.I nroff
devices:
.BR 1v ).
.
.
.TP
.B Hps2
configures the amount of vertical space preceding a heading at or below
the
.B Hps
threshold;
see
.B H
.RI ( troff
devices:
.BR 1v ;
.I nroff
devices:
.BR 2v ).
.
.
.TP
.B Hs
sets the heading level threshold for application of succeeding vertical
space.
.
If the heading level is greater than
.BR Hs ,
the heading is followed by vertical space in the amount of
.RB register\~ Hss ;
see
.B H
.RB ( 2 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Hss
is multiplied by register
.B Lsp
to produce vertical space after headings above the
threshold in
.RB register\~ Hs ;
see
.B H
.RB ( 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Ht
suppresses output of heading level counters above the lowest when the
heading is formatted;
see
.B H
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.
.TP
.B Hu
sets the heading level used by unnumbered headings;
see
.B HU
.RB ( 2 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Hy
enables automatic hyphenation of words
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Iso
configures the use of ISO\~8601 date format
if specified
(with any value)
on the command line;
see
.BR ISODATE .
.
The default is determined by localization files.
.
.
.TP
.B L
defines the page length for the document,
and must be set from the command line.
.
A scaling unit should be appended.
.
The default is that of the selected
.I groff
output device.
.
.
.TP
.B Le
.TQ
.B Lf
.TQ
.B Lt
.TQ
.B Lx
configure the report of lists of equation,
figure,
table,
and exhibit captions,
respectively,
after a table of contents;
see
.B TC
(Boolean-valued;
.BR Le :\~ 0 ;
.BR Lf ,
.BR Lt ,
.BR Lx :\~ 1 ).
.
.
.\" XXX: What is the rationale for this feature?
.TP
.B Letwam
sets the maximum number of input lines permitted in a writer's address;
see
.B WA
and
.B WE
.RB ( 14 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Li
configures the amount of indentation in ens applied to list items;
see
.B LI
.RB ( 6 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Limsp
inserts a space between the prefix and the mark
in automatically numbered lists;
see
.B AL
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Ls
sets a threshold for placement of vertical space before list items.
.
If the list nesting level is greater than this value,
no such spacing occurs;
see
.B LI
.RB ( 99 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Lsp
configures the base amount of vertical space used for separation
in the document.
.
.I mm
applies this spacing to many contexts,
sometimes with multipliers;
see
.BR DS ,
.BR FS ,
.BR H ,
.BR LI ,
and
.B P
.RI ( troff
devices:
.BR 0.5v ;
.I nroff
devices:
.BR 1v ).
.
.
.TP
.B N
configures the header and footer placements used by
.BR PH .
.
The default footer is empty.
.
If \[lq]section-page\[rq] numbering is selected,
the default header becomes empty
and the default footer becomes
.RI \[lq] x - y \[rq],
where
.IR x \~is
is the section number
(the number of the current first-level heading)
.RI and\~ y
the page number within the section.
.\" XXX: section-figure numbering needs more documentation.
.
The following values are recognized;
for finer control,
see
.BR PH ,
.BR PF ,
.BR EH ,
.BR EF ,
.BR OH ,
and
.BR OF ,
and registers
.B Sectf
and
.BR Sectp .
.
Value 5 is a GNU extension
.RB ( 0 ).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lb Lb
L Lx.
Value@Effect
0@Set header on all pages.
1@Move header to footer on page 1.
2@Omit header on page 1.
3@Use \[lq]section-page\[rq] numbering style on all pages.
4@Omit header on all pages.
5@T{
Use \[lq]section-page\[rq] and \[lq]section-figure\[rq] \
numbering style on all pages.
T}
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B Np
causes paragraphs after first-level headings (only) to be numbered
in the format
.IR s . p ,
where
.IR s \~is
is the section number
(the number of the current first-level heading)
and
.IR p \~is
the paragraph number,
starting at 1;
see
.B H
and
.B P
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.TP
.B O
defines the page offset of the document,
and must be set from the command line.
.
A scaling unit should be appended.
.
The default
.RB is\~ \&.75i
on terminal devices.
.
On typesetters,
it is
.B \&.963i
or set to
.B 1i
by the
.I papersize.tmac
package;
see
.MR groff_tmac 5 .
.
.
.TP
.B Oc
suppresses the appearance of page numbers in the table of contents;
see
.B TC
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.\" XXX: This really should just be a string, shouldn't it?
.TP
.B Of
selects a separator format within equation,
exhibit,
figure,
and table captions;
see
.BR EC ,
.BR EX ,
.BR FG ,
and
.BR TB .
.
The following values are recognized;
the spaces shown are unpaddable
.RB ( 0 ).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lb Lb
L Lx.
Value@Effect
0@\[dq].  \[dq]
1@\[dq] \[em] \[dq]
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B P
interpolates the current page number;
it is the same as
.RB register\~ %
except when
\[lq]section-page\[rq] numbering is enabled.
.
.
.TP
.B Pi
configures the amount of indentation in ens applied to the first line of
a paragraph;
see
.B P
.RB ( 5 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Pgps
causes the type size and vertical spacing set by
.B S
to apply to headers and footers,
overriding the
.B HP
string.
.
If not set,
.B S
calls affect headers and footers only when followed by
.BR PH ,
.BR PF ,
.BR OH ,
.BR EH ,
.BR OF ,
or
.B OE
calls
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Ps
is multiplied by register
.B Lsp
to vertically separate paragraphs;
see
.B P
.RB ( 1 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Pt
determines when a first-line indentation is applied to a paragraph;
see
.B P
.RB ( 0 ).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lb Lb
L Lx.
Value@Effect
0@never
1@always
2@T{
always,
except immediately after
.BR H ,
.BR DE ,
or
.B LE
T}
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B Ref
is used internally to control
.MR mmroff 1 's
two-pass approach to index and reference management;
see
.B INITI
and
.B RS
(Boolean-valued;
.BR 0 ).
.
.
.\" XXX: Why is this not named `Rpej`?
.TP
.B Rpe
configures the default page ejection policy for reference pages;
see
.B RP
.RB ( 0 ).
.
.
.IP
.TS
tab(@);
Lb Lb
L Lx.
Value@Effect
0@Break the page before and after the list of references.
1@Suppress page break after the list.
2@Suppress page break before the list.
3@Suppress page breaks before and after the list.
.TE
.
.
.TP
.B S
defines the type size for the document,
and must be set from the command line.
.
A scaling unit should be appended;
.B p
is typical
.RB ( 10p ).
.
.
.TP
.B Sectf
selects the \[lq]section-figure\[rq] numbering style.
.
Its default
.RB is\~ 0
unless
.RB register\~ N
is set
.RB to\~ 5
at the command line
(Boolean-valued).
.
.
.TP
.B Sectp
selects the \[lq]section-page\[rq] numbering style.
.
Its default
.RB is\~ 0
unless
.RB register\~ N
is set
.RB to\~ 3
.RB or\~ 5
at the command line
(Boolean-valued).
.
.
.TP
.B Si
configures the amount of display indentation in ens;
see
.B DS
.RB ( 5 ).
.
.
.TP
.B Tb
is an auto-incrementing table counter;
see
.BR TB .
.
.
.TP
.B V
defines the vertical spacing for the document,
and must be set from the command line.
.
A scaling unit should be appended;
.B p
is typical.
.
The default vertical spacing is 120% of the type size.
.
.
.TP
.B Verbin
configures the amount of indentation for verbatim displays
when indentation is selected;
see
.B \%VERBON
.RB ( 5n ).
.
.
.TP
.B W
defines the \[lq]width\[rq]
of the document
(that is,
the length of an output line with no indentation);
it must be set from the command line.
.
A scaling unit should be appended.
.
The default
.RB is\~ 6i
or assigned by the
.I papersize.tmac
package;
see
.MR groff_tmac 5 .
.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Internals
.\" ====================================================================
.
The
.B LT
letter macros call further macros depending on the letter type,
with which they are suffixed.
.
It is therefore possible to define additional letter types,
either in the territory-specific macro file,
or as local additions.
.
.B LT
sets the registers
.B Pt
and
.B Pi
to 0 and\~5, \" XXX: ...but doesn't use Pi for indentation...
respectively.
.\" XXX: and why aren't both of these actions the responsibility of
.\" let@init_type as described below?
.
The following macros must be defined to support a new letter type.
.
.
.TP
.BI let@init_ type
.B LT
calls this macro to initialize any registers and other data needed by
the letter type.
.
.
.TP
.BI let@head_ type
formats the letterhead;
it is called instead of the usual page header macro.
.
Its definition should remove the alias
.B let@header
unless the letterhead is desired on subsequent pages.
.
.
.TP
.BI let@sg_ type\~\c
.IR "name title n is-final\~" [ SG-arg\~ .\|.\|.]
.B SG
calls this macro only for letters;
.B MT
memoranda have their own signature processing.
.
.I name
and
.I title
are specified through
.BR WA / WE .
.
.IR n \~is
the index of the
.IR n th
writer,
and
.I is-final
is true for the last writer to be listed.
.
Further
.B SG
arguments are appended to the signature line.
.
.
.TP
.BI let@fc_ "type closing"
This macro is called by
.BR FC ,
and has the formal closing as the argument.
.
.
.P
.B LO
implements letter options.
.
It requires that a string named
.BI Let type
be defined,
where
.I type
is the letter type.
.
.B LO
then assigns its second argument
.RI ( value )
to the string
.BI let*lo\- type\c
\&.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\".SH BUGS
.\" ====================================================================
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\%m.tmac
is the
.I groff
implementation of the memorandum macros.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm.tmac
is wrapper to load
.IR m.tmac .
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/refer\-mm.tmac
implements
.MR \%refer 1
support for
.IR mm .
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm/ms.cov
implements an
.IR ms -like
cover sheet.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm/0.MT
implements memorandum types 0\[en]3 and 6.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm/4.MT
implements memorandum type 4.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm/5.MT
implements memorandum type 5.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/mm/locale
performs any (further) desired necessary localization;
empty by default.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU version of the
.I mm
macro package was written by
.MT jh@\:axis\:.se
J\[:o]rgen H\[:a]gg
.ME
of Lund, Sweden.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.UR https://tkurtbond\:.github\:.io/\:troff/\:mm\-all\:.pdf
.I MM \- A Macro Package for Generating Documents
.UE ,
the DWB\~3.3
.I mm
manual,
introduces the package but does not document GNU extensions.
.
.
.P
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
by Trent A.\& Fisher and Werner Lemberg,
is the primary
.I groff
manual.
.
You can browse it interactively with \[lq]info groff\[rq].
.
.
.P
.MR groff 1 ,
.MR \%troff 1 ,
.MR \%tbl 1 ,
.MR \%pic 1 ,
.MR \%eqn 1 ,
.MR \%refer 1 ,
.MR groff_mmse 7
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_mm_7_man_C]
.do rr *groff_groff_mm_7_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
