.TH grolj4 1 "2 July 2023" "groff 1.23.0"
.SH Name
grolj4 \-
.I groff
output driver for HP LaserJet 4 and compatible printers
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1994-2020, 2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_grolj4_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.\" This macro definition is poor style from a portability standpoint,
.\" but it's a good test and demonstration of the standard font
.\" repertoire for the devices where it has any effect at all, and so
.\" should be retained.
.de FT
.  if '\\*(.T'lj4' .ft \\$1
..
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY grolj4
.RB [ \-l ]
.RB [ \-c\~\c
.IR num-copies ]
.RB [ \-d
.RI [ n ]]
.RB [ \-F\~\c
.IR font-directory ]
.RB [ \-p\~\c
.IR paper-format ]
.RB [ \-w\~\c
.IR line-width ]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.SY grolj4
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY grolj4
.B \-v
.
.SY grolj4
.B \-\-version
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
This GNU
.I roff
output driver translates the output of
.MR \%troff 1
into a PCL5 format suitable for an HP LaserJet 4 printer.
.
Normally,
.I grolj4
is invoked by
.MR groff 1
when the latter is given the
.RB \[lq] \-T\~lj4 \[rq]
option.
.
(In this installation,
.B \%ps
is the default output device.)
.
Use
.IR groff 's
.B \-P
option to pass any options shown above to
.IR grolj4 .
.
If no
.I file
arguments are given,
or if
.I file
is \[lq]\-\[rq],
.I grolj4
reads the standard input stream.
.
Output is written to the standard output stream.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Typefaces
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I grolj4
supports the standard four styles:
.B R
(roman),
.B I
.RI ( italic ),
.B B
.RB ( bold ),
and
.B BI
(\f[BI]bold-italic\f[]).
.
Fonts are grouped into families
.BR A ,
.BR C ,
.BR G ,
.BR O ,
.BR T ,
.BR TN ,
.BR U ,
and
.B UC
having members in each style.
.
.
.RS
.TP 14n
.B AB
.FT AB
Arial Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B ABI
.FT ABI
Arial Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AI
.FT AI
Arial Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AR
.FT AR
Arial Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CB
.FT CB
Courier Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CBI
.FT CBI
Courier Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CI
.FT CI
Courier Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CR
.FT CR
Courier Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B GB
.FT GB
Garamond Halbfett
.FT
.
.TQ
.B GBI
.FT GBI
Garamond Kursiv Halbfett
.FT
.
.TQ
.B GI
.FT GI
Garamond Kursiv
.FT
.
.TQ
.B GR
.FT GR
Garamond Antiqua
.FT
.
.TQ
.B OB
.FT OB
CG Omega Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B OBI
.FT OBI
CG Omega Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B OI
.FT OI
CG Omega Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B OR
.FT OR
CG Omega Roman
.
.TQ
.B OB
.FT OB
CG Omega Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B OBI
.FT OBI
CG Omega Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B OI
.FT OI
CG Omega Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B OR
.FT OR
CG Omega Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TB
.FT TB
CG Times Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TBI
.FT TBI
CG Times Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TI
.FT TI
CG Times Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TR
.FT TR
CG Times Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TNRB
.FT TNRB
M Times Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TNRBI
.FT TNRBI
M Times Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TNRI
.FT TNRI
M Times Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TNRR
.FT TNRR
M Times Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UB
.FT UB
Univers Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UBI
.FT UBI
Univers Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UI
.FT UI
Univers Medium Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UR
.FT UR
Univers Medium
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UCB
.FT UCB
Univers Condensed Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UCBI
.FT UCBI
Univers Condensed Bold Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UCI
.FT UCI
Univers Condensed Medium Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B UCR
.FT UCR
Univers Condensed Medium
.FT
.RE
.
.
.P
The following fonts are not members of a family.
.
.
.RS
.TP 14n
.B ALBB
.FT ALBB
Albertus Extra Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B ALBR
.FT ALBR
Albertus Medium
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AOB
.FT AOB
Antique Olive Bold
.
.TQ
.B AOI
.FT AOI
Antique Olive Italic
.
.TQ
.B AOR
.FT AOR
Antique Olive Roman
.
.TQ
.B CLARENDON
.FT CLARENDON
Clarendon
.
.TQ
.B CORONET
.FT CORONET
Coronet
.
.TQ
.B LGB
.FT LGB
Letter Gothic Bold
.
.TQ
.B LGI
.FT LGI
Letter Gothic Italic
.
.TQ
.B LGR
.FT LGR
Letter Gothic Roman
.
.TQ
.B MARIGOLD
.FT MARIGOLD
Marigold
.RE
.
.
.P
The special font is
.B S
(PostScript Symbol);
.B SYMBOL
(M Symbol),
and
.B WINGDINGS
(Wingdings)
are also available but not mounted by default.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Paper format and device description file"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I grolj4
supports paper formats
.RB \[lq] A4 \[rq],
.RB \[lq] B5 \[rq],
.RB \[lq] C5 \[rq],
.RB \[lq] com10 \[rq],
.RB \[lq] DL \[rq],
.RB \%\[lq] executive \[rq],
.RB \%\[lq] legal \[rq],
.RB \%\[lq] letter \[rq],
and
.RB \[lq] monarch \[rq].
.
These are matched case-insensitively.
.
The
.B \-p
option overrides any setting in the device description file
.IR DESC .
.
If neither specifies a paper format,
\[lq]letter\[rq] is assumed.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Font description files"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I grolj4
recognizes four font description file directives in addition to those
documented in
.MR groff_font 5 .
.
.
.TP
.BI pclweight\~ n
Set the stroke weight to
.IR n ,
an integer in the range \-7 to +7;
the default is\~0.
.
.
.TP
.BI pclstyle\~ n
Set the style to
.IR n ,
an integer in the range 0 to 32767;
the default is\~0.
.
.
.TP
.BI pclproportional\~ n
Set the proportional spacing Boolean flag to
.IR n ,
which can be either 0 or\~1;
the default is\~0.
.
.
.TP
.BI pcltypeface\~ n
Set the typeface family to
.IR n ,
an integer in the range 0 to 65535;
the default is\~0.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Drawing commands"
.\" ====================================================================
.
An additional drawing command is recognized as an extension to those
documented in
.MR groff 7 .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]R\~ "dh dv" \[aq]
Draw a rule
(solid black rectangle)
with one corner at the drawing position,
and the diagonally opposite corner at the drawing position
.RI +( dh , dv ),
at which the drawing position will be afterward.
.
This generates a PCL fill rectangle command,
and so will work on printers that do not support HP-GL/2,
unlike the other
.B \[rs]D
commands.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Fonts
.\" ====================================================================
.
Nominally,
all Hewlett-Packard LaserJet\~\%4-series and newer printers have the
same internal fonts:
45 scalable fonts and one bitmapped Lineprinter font.
.
The scalable fonts are available in sizes between 0.25 points and 999.75
points,
in 0.25-point increments;
the Lineprinter font is available only in 8.5-point size.
.
.
.P
The LaserJet font files included with
.I groff
assume that all printers since the LaserJet\~4 are identical.
.
There are some differences between fonts in the earlier and more recent
printers,
however.
.
The LaserJet\~4 printer used Agfa Intellifont technology for 35 of the
internal scalable fonts;
the remaining 10 scalable fonts were TrueType.
.
Beginning with the LaserJet\~\%4000-series printers introduced in 1997,
all scalable internal fonts have been TrueType.
.
The number of printable glyphs differs slightly between Intellifont and
TrueType fonts
(generally,
the TrueType fonts include more glyphs),
and
there are some minor differences in glyph metrics.
.
Differences among printer models are described in the
.I "PCL\~5 Comparison Guide"
and the
.I "PCL\~5 Comparison Guide Addendum"
(for printers introduced since approximately 2001).
.
.
.P
LaserJet printers reference a glyph by a combination of a 256-glyph
symbol set and an index within that symbol set.
.
Many glyphs appear in more than one symbol set;
all combinations of symbol set and index that reference the same glyph
are equivalent.
.
For each glyph,
.MR hpftodit 1
searches a list of symbol sets,
and selects the first set that contains the glyph.
.
The printing code generated by
.I hpftodit
is an integer that encodes a numerical value for the symbol set in the
high byte(s),
and the index in the low byte.
.
See
.MR groff_font 5
for a complete description of the font file format;
symbol sets are described in greater detail in the
.IR "PCL\~5 Printer Language Technical Reference Manual" .
.
.
.P
Two of the scalable fonts,
Symbol and Wingdings,
are bound to 256-glyph symbol sets;
the remaining scalable fonts,
as well as the Lineprinter font,
support numerous symbol sets,
sufficient to enable printing of more than 600 glyphs.
.
.
.P
The metrics generated by
.I hpftodit
assume that the
.I DESC
file contains values of 1200 for
.I res
and 6350 for
.IR unitwidth ,
or any combination
(e.g.,
2400 and 3175)
for which
.IR res \~\[tmu]\~ unitwidth \~=\~7\|620\|000.
.
Although HP PCL\~5 LaserJet printers support an internal resolution of
7200 units per inch,
they use a 16-bit signed integer for positioning;
if
.B devlj4
is to support U.S.\& ledger paper (11\~in\~\[mu]\~17\~in;
in = inch),
the maximum usable resolution is 32\|767\~\[di]\~17,
or 1927 units per inch,
which rounds down to 1200 units per inch.
.
If the largest required paper dimension is less
(e.g.,
8.5\~in\~\[mu]\~11\~in,
or A5),
a greater
.I res
(and lesser
.IR unitwidth )
can be specified.
.
.
.P
Font metrics for Intellifont fonts were provided by Tagged Font Metric
(TFM) files originally developed by Agfa/Compugraphic.
.
The TFM files provided for these fonts supported 600+ glyphs and
contained extensive lists of kerning pairs.
.
.
.P
To accommodate developers who had become accustomed to TFM files,
HP also provided TFM files for the 10 TrueType fonts included in the
LaserJet\~4.
.
The TFM files for TrueType fonts generally included less information
than the Intellifont TFMs,
supporting fewer glyphs,
and in most cases,
providing no kerning information.
.
By the time the LaserJet\~4000 printer was introduced,
most developers had migrated to other means of obtaining font metrics,
and support for new TFM files was very limited.
.
The TFM files provided for the TrueType fonts in the LaserJet\~4000
support only the Latin 2 (ISO 8859-2) symbol set,
and include no kerning information;
consequently,
they are of little value for any but the most rudimentary documents.
.
.
.P
Because the Intellifont TFM files contain considerably more information,
they generally are preferable to the TrueType TFM files even for use
with the TrueType fonts in the newer printers.
.
The metrics for the TrueType fonts are very close,
though not identical,
to those for the earlier Intellifont fonts of the same names.
.
Although most output using the Intellifont metrics with the newer
printers is quite acceptable,
a few glyphs may fail to print as expected.
.
The differences in glyph metrics may be particularly noticeable with
composite parentheses,
brackets,
and braces used by
.MR eqn 1 .
.
A script,
located in
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devlj4/\:generate ,
can be used to adjust the metrics for these glyphs in the special font
\[lq]S\[rq] for use with printers that have all TrueType fonts.
.
.
.P
At the time HP last supported TFM files,
only version 1.0 of the Unicode standard was available.
.
Consequently,
many glyphs lacking assigned code points were assigned by HP to the
Private Use Area (PUA).
.
Later versions of the Unicode standard included code points outside the
PUA for many of these glyphs.
.
The HP-supplied TrueType TFM files use the PUA assignments;
TFM files generated from more recent TrueType font files require the
later Unicode values to access the same glyphs.
.
Consequently,
two different mapping files may be required:
one for the HP-supplied TFM files,
and one for more recent TFM files.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-\-help
displays a usage message,
while
.B \-v
and
.B \-\-version
show version information;
all exit afterward.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-c\~ num-copies
Format
.I num-copies
copies of each page.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-d \~[\c
.IR n ]
Use duplex mode
.IR n :
1\~is long-side binding (default),
and 2\~is short-side binding.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-F " font-directory"
Prepend directory
.IR font-directory /dev name
to the search path for font and device description files;
.I name
is the name of the device,
usually
.BR lj4 .
.
.
.TP
.B \-l
Format the document in landscape orientation.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-p " paper-format"
Set the paper format to
.IR paper-format ,
which must be a valid paper format as described above.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-w " line-width"
Set the default line thickness to
.I line-width
thousandths of an em;
the default is
.B 40
(0.04\~em).
.
.
.br
.ne 4v \" Keep section heading and paragraph together.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Environment
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
lists directories in which to seek the selected output device's
directory of device and font description files.
.
See
.MR \%troff 1
and
.MR groff_font 5 .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devlj4/\:DESC
describes the
.B lj4
output device.
.
.
.TP
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devlj4/ F
describes the font known
.RI as\~ F
on device
.BR lj4 .
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\:lj4\:.tmac
defines macros for use with the
.B lj4
output device.
.
It is automatically loaded by
.I troffrc
when the
.B lj4
output device is selected.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Bugs
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" XXX: What does this mean?  The period/full stop glyph?  Flyspecks?
Small dots.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.UR http://\:www\:.hp\:.com/\:ctg/\:Manual/\:bpl13210\:.pdf
.I HP PCL/PJL Reference:
.I PCL\~5 Printer Language Technical Reference Manual,
.I Part I
.UE
.
.
.P
.MR hpftodit 1 ,
.MR groff 1 ,
.MR \%troff 1 ,
.MR groff_out 5 ,
.MR groff_font 5 ,
.MR groff_char 7
.
.
.\" Clean up.
.rm FT
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_grolj4_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_grolj4_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
