.TH gropdf 1 "2 July 2023" "groff 1.23.0"
.SH Name
gropdf \-
.I groff
output driver for Portable Document Format
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2011-2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_gropdf_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.
.\" This macro definition is poor style from a portability standpoint,
.\" but it's a good test and demonstration of the standard font
.\" repertoire for the devices where it has any effect at all, and so
.\" should be retained.
.de FT
.  if '\\*(.T'ps' .ft \\$1
.  if '\\*(.T'pdf' .ft \\$1
..
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY gropdf
.RB [ \-dels ]
.RB [ \-F\~\c
.IR font-directory ]
.RB [ \-I\~\c
.IR inclusion-directory ]
.RB [ \-p\~\c
.IR paper-format ]
\#.RB [ \-w\~\c
\#.IR n ]
.RB [ \-u
.RI [ cmap-file ]]
.RB [ \-y\~\c
.IR foundry ]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.SY gropdf
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY gropdf
.B \-v
.
.SY gropdf
.B \-\-version
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU
.I roff
PDF output driver translates the output of
.MR \%troff 1
into Portable Document Format.
.
Normally,
.I gropdf
is invoked by
.MR groff 1
when the latter is given the
.RB \[lq] \-T\~pdf \[rq]
option.
.
(In this installation,
.B \%ps
is the default output device.)
.
Use
.IR groff 's
.B \-P
option to pass any options shown above to
.IR gropdf .
.
If no
.I file
arguments are given,
or if
.I file
is \[lq]\-\[rq],
.I gropdf
reads the standard input stream.
.
Output is written to the standard output stream.
.
.
.P
See section \[lq]Font installation\[rq] below for a guide to installing
fonts for
.IR gropdf .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-\-help
displays a usage message,
while
.B \-v
and
.B \-\-version
show version information;
all exit afterward.
.
.
.TP
.B \-d
Include debug information as comments within the PDF.
.
Also produces an uncompressed PDF.
.
.
.TP
.B \-e
Forces
.I gropdf
to embed
.I all
fonts (even the 14 base PDF fonts).
.
.
.TP
.BI \-F " dir"
Prepend directory
.IR dir /dev name
to the search path for font, and device description files;
.I name
is the name of the device, usually
.BR pdf .
.
.TP
.BI \-I\~ dir
Search the directory
.I dir
for files named in
.B \[rs]X\[aq]pdf: pdfpic\[aq]
device control commands.
.
.B \-I
may be specified more than once;
each
.I dir
is searched in the given order.
.
To search the current working directory before others,
add
.RB \[lq] "\-I .\&" \[rq]
at the desired place;
it is otherwise searched last.
.
.
.TP
.B \-l
Orient the document in landscape format.
.
.TP
.BI \-p " paper-format"
Set the physical dimensions of the output medium.
.
This overrides the
.BR papersize ,
.BR paperlength ,
and
.B paperwidth
directives in the
.I DESC
file;
it accepts the same arguments as the
.B papersize
directive.
.
See
.MR groff_font 5
for details.
.
.
.TP
.B \-s
Append a comment line to end of PDF showing statistics,
i.e.\& number of pages in document.
.
Ghostscript's
.B ps2pdf
complains about this line if it is included, but works anyway.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-u \~[\c
.IR cmap-file ]
.I gropdf
normally includes a ToUnicode CMap with any font created using
.I text.enc
as the encoding file,
this makes it easier to search for words which contain ligatures.
.
You can include your own CMap by specifying a
.I cmap-file
or have no CMap at all by omitting the argument.
.
.
.\" .TP
.\" .BI \-w n
.\" Lines should be drawn using a thickness of
.\" .IR n \~\c
.\" thousandths of an em.
.\" .
.\" If this option is not given, the line thickness defaults to
.\" 0.04\~em.
.\" .
.\" .
.TP
.BI \-y " foundry"
Set the foundry to use for selecting fonts of the same name.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Usage
.\" ====================================================================
.
The input to
.I gropdf
must be in the format output by
.MR \%troff 1 .
.
This is described in
.MR groff_out 5 .
.
In addition, the device and font description files for the device used
must meet certain requirements:
.
The resolution must be an integer multiple of\~72 times the
.BR sizescale .
.
The
.B pdf
device uses a resolution of 72000 and a sizescale of 1000.
.
.
.LP
The device description file must contain a valid paper format;
see
.MR groff_font 5 .
.
.I gropdf
uses the same Type\~1 Adobe PostScript fonts as the
.B grops
device driver.
.
Although the PDF Standard allows the use of other font types (like
TrueType) this implementation only accepts the Type\~1 PostScript
font.
.
Fewer Type\~1 fonts are supported natively in PDF documents than the
standard 35 fonts supported by
.B grops
and all PostScript printers, but all the fonts are available since any
which aren't supported natively are automatically embedded in the
PDF.
.
.
.LP
.I gropdf
supports the concept of foundries,
that is different versions of basically the same font.
.
During install a
.I Foundry
file controls where fonts are found and builds
.I groff
fonts from the files it discovers on your system.
.
.
.LP
Each font description file must contain a command
.
.IP
.BI internalname\  psname
.
.LP
which says that the PostScript name of the font is
.IR psname .
.
Lines starting with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored.
.
The code for each character given in the font file must correspond
to the code in the default encoding for the font.
.
This code can be used with the
.B \[rs]N
escape sequence in
.B troff
to select the character,
even if the character does not have a
.I groff
name.
.
Every character in the font file must exist in the PostScript font, and
the widths given in the font file must match the widths used
in the PostScript font.
.
.
.LP
Note that
.I gropdf
is currently only able to display the first 256 glyphs in any font.
This restriction will be lifted in a later version.
.
.
.\" .LP
.\" Note that
.\" .B grops
.\" is able to display all glyphs in a PostScript font, not only 256.
.\" .I enc_file
.\" (or the default encoding if no encoding file specified) just defines
.\" the order of glyphs for the first 256 characters;
.\" all other glyphs are accessed with additional encoding vectors which
.\" .B grops
.\" produces on the fly.
.
.
.LP
.I gropdf
can automatically include the downloadable fonts necessary
to print the document.
.
Fonts may be in PFA or PFB format.
.LP
.
Any downloadable fonts which should, when required, be included by
.I gropdf
must be listed in the file
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devpdf/\:\%download ;
this should consist of lines of the form
.
.IP
.I
foundry font filename
.
.LP
where
.I foundry
is the foundry name or blank for the default foundry.
.
.I font
is the PostScript name of the font,
and
.I filename
is the name of the file containing the font;
lines beginning with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored;
fields must be separated by tabs
(spaces are
.B not
allowed);
.I filename
is searched for using the same mechanism that is used
for
.I groff
font metric files.
.
The
.I download
file itself is also sought using this mechanism.
.
Foundry names are usually a single character
(such as \[oq]U\[cq] for the URW foundry)
or empty for the default foundry.
.
This default uses the same fonts as
.I ghostscript
uses when it embeds fonts in a PDF file.
.
.
.LP
In the default setup there are styles called
.BR R ,
.BR I ,
.BR B ,
and
.B BI
mounted at font positions 1 to\~4.
.
The fonts are grouped into families
.BR A ,
.BR BM ,
.BR C ,
.BR H ,
.BR HN ,
.BR N ,
.BR P ,
and\~\c
.B T
having members in each of these styles:
.
.RS
.TP
.B AR
.FT AR
AvantGarde-Book
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AI
.FT AI
AvantGarde-BookOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AB
.FT AB
AvantGarde-Demi
.FT
.
.TQ
.B ABI
.FT ABI
AvantGarde-DemiOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMR
.FT BMR
Bookman-Light
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMI
.FT BMI
Bookman-LightItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMB
.FT BMB
Bookman-Demi
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMBI
.FT BMBI
Bookman-DemiItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CR
.FT CR
Courier
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CI
.FT CI
Courier-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CB
.FT CB
Courier-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CBI
.FT CBI
Courier-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HR
.FT HR
Helvetica
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HI
.FT HI
Helvetica-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HB
.FT HB
Helvetica-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HBI
.FT HBI
Helvetica-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNR
.FT HNR
Helvetica-Narrow
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNI
.FT HNI
Helvetica-Narrow-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNB
.FT HNB
Helvetica-Narrow-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNBI
.FT HNBI
Helvetica-Narrow-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NR
.FT NR
NewCenturySchlbk-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NI
.FT NI
NewCenturySchlbk-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NB
.FT NB
NewCenturySchlbk-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NBI
.FT NBI
NewCenturySchlbk-BoldItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PR
.FT PR
Palatino-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PI
.FT PI
Palatino-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PB
.FT PB
Palatino-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PBI
.FT PBI
Palatino-BoldItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TR
.FT TR
Times-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TI
.FT TI
Times-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TB
.FT TB
Times-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TBI
.FT TBI
Times-BoldItalic
.FT
.RE
.
.
.LP
There is also the following font which is not a member of a family:
.
.RS
.TP
.B ZCMI
.FT ZCMI
ZapfChancery-MediumItalic
.FT
.RE
.
.
.LP
There are also some special fonts called
.B S
for the PS Symbol font.
.
The lower case greek characters are automatically slanted (to match
the SymbolSlanted font (SS) available to PostScript).
.
Zapf Dingbats is available as
.BR ZD ;
the \[lq]hand pointing left\[rq] glyph
.RB ( \[rs][lh] )
is available since it has been defined using the
.B \[rs]X\[aq]pdf: xrev\[aq]
device control command,
which reverses the direction of letters within words.
.
.
.LP
The default color for
.B \[rs]m
and
.B \[rs]M
is black.
.
.
.LP
.I gropdf
understands some of the device control commands supported by
.MR grops 1 .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: invis\[aq]
Suppress output.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: endinvis\[aq]
Stop suppressing output.
.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec gsave currentpoint 2 copy translate\~" n\~\c
.B rotate neg exch neg exch translate\[aq]
where
.I n
is the angle of rotation.
.
This is to support the
.B align
command in
.MR \%pic 1 .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec grestore\[aq]
Used by
.MR \%pic 1
to restore state after rotation.
.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec " "n\~" "setlinejoin\[aq]"
where
.I n
can be one of the following values.
.
.
.IP
0 = Miter join
.br
1 = Round join
.br
2 = Bevel join
.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec " "n " "setlinecap\[aq]"
where
.I n
can be one of the following values.
.
.
.IP
0 = Butt cap
.br
1 = Round cap, and
.br
2 = Projecting square cap
.
.
.LP
.TP
.BR "\[rs]X\[aq]ps:\~" .\|.\|.\& "\~pdfmark\[aq]"
All the
.I pdfmark
macros installed by using
.I \-m pdfmark
or
.I \-m mspdf
(see documentation in
.IR pdfmark.pdf ).
.
A subset of these macros are installed automatically when you use
.B \-Tpdf
so you should not need to use
.RB \[lq] "\-m pdfmark" \[rq]
to access most PDF functionality.
.
.
.LP
.I gropdf
also supports a subset of the commands introduced in
.IR present.tmac .
.
Specifically it supports:-
.
.
.IP
PAUSE
.br
BLOCKS
.br
BLOCKE
.
.
.LP
Which allows you to create presentation type PDFs.
.
Many of the other
commands are already available in other macro packages.
.
.
.LP
These commands are implemented with
.I groff
X commands:-
.
.
.LP
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec %%%%PAUSE\[aq]
The section before this is treated as a block and is introduced using
the current
.B BLOCK
transition setting
(see
.RB \[lq] "\[rs]X\[aq]pdf: transition\[aq]" \[rq]
below).
.
Equivalently,
.B \%.pdfpause
is available as a macro.
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec %%%%BEGINONCE\[aq]
Any text following this command (up to %%%%ENDONCE) is shown only once,
the next %%%%PAUSE will remove it.
If producing a non-presentation PDF, i.e.\&
ignoring the pauses, see
.I \%GROPDF_NOSLIDE
below, this text is ignored.
.LP
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec %%%%ENDONCE\[aq]
This terminates the block defined by %%%%BEGINONCE.
This pair of commands
is what implements the \&.BLOCKS Once/.BLOCKE commands in
.IR present.tmac .
.
.
.LP
The
.I mom
macro package already integrates these extensions,
so you can build slides with
.IR mom .
.
.
.LP
If you use
.I present.tmac
with
.I gropdf
there is no need to run the program
.MR presentps 1
since the output will already be a presentation PDF.
.
.
.LP
All other
.B ps:
tags are silently ignored.
.
.
.LP
One
.B \[rs]X
device control command used by the DVI driver is also recognised.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]X\[aq]papersize= paper-format \[aq]
where the
.I paper-format
parameter is the same as that to the
.B papersize
directive.
.
See
.MR groff_font 5 .
.
This means that you can alter the page size at will within the PDF file
being created by
.IR gropdf .
.
If you do want to change the paper format,
it must be done before you start creating the page.
.
.
.LP
.I gropdf
supports several more device control features using the
.B pdf:
tag.
.
Some have counterpart
.I convenience macros
that take the same arguments and behave equivalently.
.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]pdf: pdfpic\~" file\~\c
.IR "alignment width height line-length" \[aq]
Place an image of the specified
.I width
containing the PDF drawing from file
.I file
of desired
.I width
and
.I height
(if
.I height
is missing or zero then it is scaled proportionally).
.
If
.I alignment
is
.B \-L
the drawing is left-aligned.
.
If it is
.B \-C
or
.B \-R
a
.I line-length
greater than the width of the drawing is required as well.
.
If
.I width
is specified as zero then the width is scaled in proportion to the
height.
.
.\" .IP
.\" See
.\" .BR groff_tmac (7)
.\" for a description of the
.\" .B PSPIC
.\" macro which provides a convenient high-level interface for inclusion
.\" of PostScript graphics.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]pdf: xrev\[aq]
Toggle the reversal of glyph direction.
.
This feature works \[lq]letter by letter\[rq],
that is,
each letter in a word is reversed left-to-right,
not the entire word.
.
One application is the reversal of glyphs in the Zapf Dingbats font.
.
To restore the normal glyph orientation,
repeat the command.
.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]pdf: markstart " "/ANN-definition" \[aq]
.TQ
.B \[rs]X\[aq]pdf: markend\[aq]
Macros that support PDF bookmarks use these calls internally to
start and stop (respectively) the placement of the bookmark's
.I hot spot;
the user will have called
.RB \[lq] .pdfhref\~L \[rq]
with the text of the hot spot.
.
Normally,
these are never used except from within the
.I pdfmark
macros.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]pdf: marksuspend\[aq]
.TQ
.B \[rs]X\[aq]pdf: markrestart\[aq]
If you use a page location trap to produce a header or footer,
or otherwise interrupt a document's text,
you need to use these commands if a PDF
.I hot spot
crosses a trap boundary;
otherwise any text output by the trap will be marked as part of the hot
spot.
.
To prevent this error,
place these device control commands or their corresponding
convenience macros
.B \%.pdfmarksuspend
and
.B \%.pdfmarkrestart
at the start and end of the trap macro,
respectively.
.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]pdf: pagename\~" name \[aq]
Assign the current page a
.IR name .
.
All documents bear two default names,
.RB \[oq] top "\[cq] and \[oq]" bottom \[cq].
.
The convenience macro for this command is
.BR \%.pdfpagename .
.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X'pdf: switchtopage\~" "when name" \[aq]
Normally each new page is appended to the end of the document,
this command allows following pages to be inserted at a
.I \[oq]named\[cq]
position within the document (see pagename command above).
.I \[oq]when\[cq]
can be either
.RI \[oq] after "\[cq] or \[oq]" before \[cq].
If it is omitted it defaults to
.RI \[oq] before \[cq].
.
It should be used at the end of the page before you want the switch to
happen.
.
This allows pages such as a TOC to be moved to elsewhere in the
document,
but more esoteric uses are possible.
.
The convenience macro for this command is
.BR \%.pdfswitchtopage .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]X\[aq]pdf:\~transition\~ feature\~\c
.IB "mode duration dimension motion direction scale bool" \[aq]
where
.I feature
can be either SLIDE or BLOCK.
When it is SLIDE the transition is used
when a new slide is introduced to the screen,
if BLOCK then this transition is used for the individual blocks which
make up the slide.
.
.
.IP
.I mode
is the transition type between slides:-
.RS
.IP
.B Split
- Two lines sweep across the screen, revealing the new page.
The lines
may be either horizontal or vertical and may move inward from the
edges of the page or outward from the center, as specified by the
.I dimension
and
.I motion
entries, respectively.
.br
.B Blinds
- Multiple lines, evenly spaced across the screen, synchronously
sweep in the same direction to reveal the new page.
The lines may be
either horizontal or vertical, as specified by the
.I dimension
entry.
Horizontal
lines move downward; vertical lines move to the right.
.br
.B Box
- A rectangular box sweeps inward from the edges of the page or
outward from the center, as specified by the
.I motion
entry, revealing the new page.
.br
.B Wipe
- A single line sweeps across the screen from one edge to the other in
the direction specified by the
.I direction
entry, revealing the new page.
.br
.B Dissolve
- The old page dissolves gradually to reveal the new one.
.br
.B Glitter
- Similar to Dissolve,
except that the effect sweeps across the page in a wide band moving from
one side of the screen to the other in the direction specified by the
.I direction
entry.
.br
.B R
- The new page simply replaces the old one with no special transition
effect; the
.I direction
entry shall be ignored.
.br
.B Fly
- (PDF 1.5) Changes are flown out or in (as specified by
.IR motion ),
in the
direction specified by
.IR direction ,
to or from a location that is offscreen except
when
.I direction
is
.BR None .
.br
.B Push
- (PDF 1.5) The old page slides off the screen while the new page
slides in, pushing the old page out in the direction specified by
.IR direction .
.br
.B Cover
- (PDF 1.5) The new page slides on to the screen in the direction
specified by
.IR direction ,
covering the old page.
.br
.B Uncover
- (PDF 1.5) The old page slides off the screen in the direction
specified by
.IR direction ,
uncovering the new page in the direction
specified by
.IR direction .
.br
.B Fade
- (PDF 1.5) The new page gradually becomes visible through the
old one.
.LP
.RE
.IP
.I duration
is the length of the transition in seconds (default 1).
.LP
.IP
.I dimension
(Optional;
.BR Split " and " Blinds
transition styles only) The dimension in which the
specified transition effect shall occur:
.B H
Horizontal, or
.B V
Vertical.
.LP
.IP
.I motion
(Optional;
.BR Split ,
.BR Box " and " Fly
transition styles only) The direction of motion for
the specified transition effect:
.B I
Inward from the edges of the page, or
.B O
Outward from the center of the page.
.LP
.IP
.I direction
(Optional;
.BR Wipe ,
.BR Glitter ,
.BR Fly ,
.BR Cover ,
.BR Uncover " and " Push
transition styles only)
The direction in which the specified transition effect shall moves,
expressed in degrees counterclockwise starting from a left-to-right
direction.
If the value is a number, it shall be one of:
.B 0
= Left to right,
.B 90
= Bottom to top (Wipe only),
.B 180
= Right to left (Wipe only),
.B 270
= Top to bottom,
.B 315
= Top-left to bottom-right (Glitter only)
The value can be
.BR None ,
which is relevant only for the
.B Fly
transition when the value of
.I scale
is not 1.0.
.LP
.IP
.I scale
(Optional; PDF 1.5;
.B Fly
transition style only) The starting or ending scale at
which the changes shall be drawn.
If
.I motion
specifies an inward transition, the scale
of the changes drawn shall progress from
.I scale
to 1.0 over the course of the
transition.
If
.I motion
specifies an outward transition, the scale of the changes drawn
shall progress from 1.0 to
.I scale
over the course of the transition
.LP
.IP
.I bool
(Optional; PDF 1.5;
.B Fly
transition style only) If
.BR true ,
the area that shall be flown
in is rectangular and opaque.
.LP
.IP
This command can be used by calling the macro
.B .pdftransition
using the parameters described above.
Any of the parameters may be
replaced with a "." which signifies the parameter retains its
previous value, also any trailing missing parameters are ignored.
.LP
.IP
.B Note:
not all PDF Readers support any or all these transitions.
.LP
.
.
.TP
.BI "\eX\[aq]pdf: background\~" "cmd left top right bottom weight" \[aq]
.TQ
.B "\eX\[aq]pdf: background off\[aq]"
.TQ
.BI "\eX\[aq]pdf: background footnote\~" bottom \[aq]
produces a background rectangle on the page,
where
.RS
.TP
.I cmd
is the command,
which can be any of
.RB \[lq] page | fill | box \[rq]
in combination.
.
Thus,
.RB \[lq] pagefill \[rq]
would draw a rectangle which covers the whole current page size
(in which case the rest of the parameters can be omitted because the box
dimensions are taken from the current media size).
.
.RB \[lq] boxfill \[rq],
on the other hand,
requires the given dimensions to place the box.
.
Including
.RB \[lq] fill \[rq]
in the command will paint the rectangle with the current fill colour
(as with
.BR \[rs]M[] )
and including
.RB \[lq] box \[rq]
will give the rectangle a border in the current stroke colour
(as with
.BR \[rs]m[] ).
.
.
.IP
.I cmd
may also be
.RB \[lq] off \[rq]
on its own,
which will terminate drawing the current box.
.
If you have specified a page colour with
.RB \[lq] pagefill \[rq],
it is always the first box in the stack,
and if you specify it again,
it will replace the first entry.
.
Be aware that the
.RB \[lq]  pagefill \[rq]
box renders the page opaque,
so tools that \[lq]watermark\[rq] PDF pages are unlikely to be
successful.
.
To return the background to transparent,
issue an
.RB \[lq] off \[rq]
command with no other boxes open.
.
.
.IP
Finally,
.I cmd
may be
.RB \[lq] footnote \[rq]
followed by a new value for
.IR bottom ,
which will be used for all open boxes on the current page.
This is to allow room for footnote areas that grow while a page is
processed
(to accommodate multiple footnotes,
for instance).
.
(If the value is negative,
it is used as an offset from the bottom of the page.)
.
.
.TP
.I left
.TQ
.I top
.TQ
.I right
.TQ
.I bottom
are the coordinates of the box.
.
The
.I top
and
.I bottom
coordinates are the minimum and maximum for the box,
since the actual start of the box is
.IR groff 's
drawing position when you issue the command,
and the bottom of the box is the point where you turn the box
.RB \[lq] off \[rq].
.
The top and bottom coordinates are used only if the box drawing extends
onto the next page;
ordinarily,
they would be set to the header and footer margins.
.
.
.TP
.I weight
provides the line width for the border if
.RB \[lq] box \[rq]
is included in the command.
.
.
.P
The convenience macro for this escape sequence is
.BR .pdfbackground .
.
An
.I sboxes
macro file is also available;
see
.MR groff_tmac 5 .
.RE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Macros
.\" ====================================================================
.
.IR gropdf 's
support macros in
.I pdf\.tmac
define the convenience macros described above.
.
Some features have no direct device control command counterpart.
.
.
.\" pdfhref
.
.
.TP
.BI ".pdfinfo /" "field content"\~\c
\&.\|.\|.
Define PDF metadata.
.
.I field
may be be one of
.BR Title ,
.BR Author ,
.BR Subject ,
.BR Keywords ,
or another datum supported by the PDF standard or your reader.
.
.I field
must be prefixed with a slash.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Importing graphics"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I gropdf
supports only the inclusion of other PDF files for inline images.
.
Such a PDF file may,
however,
contain any of the graphic formats supported by
the PDF standard,
such as JPEG/JFIF,
PNG,
and GIF.
.
Any application that outputs PDF can thus be used to prepare files for
embedding in documents processed by
.I groff
and
.IR gropdf .
.
.
.P
The PDF file you wish to insert must be a single page and the drawing
must just fit inside the media size of the PDF file.
.
In
.MR inkscape 1
or
.MR gimp 1 ,
for example,
make sure the canvas size just fits the image.
.
.
.P
The PDF parser
.I gropdf
implements has not been rigorously tested with all applications that
produce PDF.
.
If you find a single-page PDF which fails to import properly,
try processing it with the
.MR pdftk 1
program.
.
.
.RS
.EX
pdftk\~\c
.I existing-file\~\c
output\~\c
.I new-file
.EE
.RE
.
You may find that
.I new-file
imports successfully.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "TrueType and other font formats"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I gropdf
does not yet support any font formats besides Adobe Type 1
(PFA or PFB).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Font installation"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The following is a step-by-step font installation guide for
.I gropdf.
.
.
.IP \[bu] 2n
Convert your font to something
.I groff
understands.
.
This is a PostScript Type\~1 font in PFA or PFB format,
together with an AFM file.
.
A PFA file begins as follows.
.
.RS
.RS \" two RS calls to get inboard of IP indentation
.EX
%!PS\-AdobeFont\-1.0:
.EE
.RE \" but only one to get back to it
.
A PFB file contains this string as well,
preceded by some non-printing bytes.
.
In the following steps,
we will consider the use of CTAN's
.UR https://\:ctan.org/\:tex\-archive/\:fonts/\:brushscr
BrushScriptX-Italic
.UE
font in PFA format.
.RE \" now restore left margin
.
.
.IP \[bu]
Convert the AFM file to a
.I groff
font description file with the
.MR afmtodit 1
program.
.
For instance,
.
.RS
.RS \" two RS calls to get inboard of IP indentation
.EX
$ \c
.B afmtodit BrushScriptX\-Italic.afm text.map BSI
.EE
.RE \" but only one to get back to it
.
converts the Adobe Font Metric file
.I BrushScriptX\-Italic.afm
to the
.I groff
font description file
.IR BSI .
.RE \" now restore left margin
.
.
.IP
If you have a font family which provides regular upright (roman),
bold,
italic,
and
bold-italic styles,
(where \[lq]italic\[rq] may be \[lq]oblique\[rq] or \[lq]slanted\[rq]),
we recommend using
.BR R ,
.BR B ,
.BR I ,
and
.BR BI ,
respectively,
as suffixes to the
.I groff
font family name to enable
.IR groff 's
font family and style selection features.
.
An example is
.IR groff 's
built-in support for Times:
the font family
name is abbreviated as
.BR T ,
and the
.I groff
font names are therefore
.BR TR ,
.BR TB ,
.BR TI ,
and
.BR TBI .
.
In our example,
however,
the BrushScriptX font is available in a single style only,
italic.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
Install the
.I groff
font description file(s) in a
.I devpdf
subdirectory in the search path that
.I groff
uses for device and font file descriptions.
.
See the
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
entry in section \[lq]Environment\[rq] of
.MR \%troff 1
for the current value of the font search path.
.
While
.I groff
doesn't directly use AFM files,
it is a good idea to store them alongside its font description files.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
Register fonts in the
.I devpdf/download
file so they can be located for embedding in PDF files
.I gropdf
generates.
.
Only the first
.I download
file encountered in the font search path is read.
.
If in doubt,
copy the default
.I download
file
(see section \[lq]Files\[rq] below)
to the first directory in the font search path and add your fonts there.
.
The PostScript font name used by
.I gropdf
is stored in the
.B internalname
field in the
.I groff
font description file.
.
(This name does not necessarily resemble the font's file name.)
.
If the font in our example had originated from a foundry named
.BR Z ,
we would add the following line to
.IR download .
.
.RS
.RS \" two RS calls to get inboard of IP indentation
.EX
Z\[->]BrushScriptX\-Italic\[->]BrushScriptX\-Italic.pfa
.EE
.RE \" but only one to get back to it
.
A tab character,
depicted as \[->],
separates the fields.
.
The default foundry has no name:
its field is empty and
entries corresponding to it start with a tab character,
as will the one in our example.
.RE \" now restore left margin
.
.
.IP \[bu]
Test the selection and embedding of the new font.
.
.RS
.RS \" two RS calls to get inboard of IP indentation
.EX
printf "\[rs]\[rs]f[BSI]Hello, world!\[rs]n" \
| groff \-T pdf \-P \-e >hello.pdf
see hello.pdf
.EE
.RE
.RE
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Environment
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to seek the selected output device's
directory of device and font description files.
.
If,
in the
.I download
file,
the font file has been specified with a full path,
no directories are searched.
.
See
.MR \%troff 1
and
.MR groff_font 5 .
.
.
.TP
.I GROPDF_NOSLIDE
If set and evaluates to a true value
(to Perl),
.\" XXX: The above is inconsistent with the way grotty(1) handles
.\" "GROFF_NO_SGR".
.I gropdf
ignores commands specific to presentation PDFs,
producing a normal PDF instead.
.
.
.TP
.I SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
A timestamp
(expressed as seconds since the Unix epoch)
to use as the output creation timestamp in place of the current time.
.
The time is converted to human-readable form using Perl's
.I \%localtime()
function and recorded in a PDF comment.
.
.
.TP
.I TZ
The time zone to use when converting the current time
(or value of
.IR SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH )
to human-readable form;
see
.MR tzset 3 .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devpdf/\:DESC
describes the
.B pdf
output device.
.
.
.TP
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devpdf/ F
describes the font known
.RI as\~ F
on device
.BR pdf .
.
.
.TP
.IR /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devpdf/\:U\- F
describes the font
from the URW foundry
(versus the Adobe default)
known
.RI as\~ F
on device
.BR pdf .
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devpdf/\%download
lists fonts available for embedding within the PDF document
(by analogy to the
.B ps
device's downloadable font support).
.
.
.\" XXX: Why are we shipping this but not BuildFoundries.pl?
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devpdf/\%Foundry
is a data file used by the
.I groff
build system to locate PostScript Type\~1 fonts.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%font/\:\%devpdf/\:enc/\:\%text\:.enc
describes the encoding scheme used by most PostScript Type\~1 fonts;
the
.B \%encoding
directive of
font description files for the
.B pdf
device refers to it.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\:pdf\:.tmac
defines macros for use with the
.B pdf
output device.
.
It is automatically loaded by
.I troffrc
when the
.B pdf
output device is selected.
.
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/\:\%pdfpic\:.tmac
defines the
.B PDFPIC
macro for embedding images in a document;
see
.MR groff_tmac 5 .
.
It is automatically loaded by
.I troffrc.
.\"
.\"
.\" .TP
.\" .B /usr/\:\%share/\:\%groff/\:\%1.23.0/\:\%tmac/pspic.tmac
.\" Definition of
.\" .B PSPIC
.\" macro,
.\" automatically loaded by
.\" .BR ps.tmac .
.\" .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I gropdf
was written and is maintained by
.MT deri@\:chuzzlewit\:.myzen\:.co\:.uk
Deri James
.ME .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%doc/\:\%groff\-1.23.0/\:\%sboxes/\:\%msboxes\:.ms
.TQ
.I /usr/\:\%share/\:\%doc/\:\%groff\-1.23.0/\:\%sboxes/\:\%msboxes\:.pdf
\[lq]Using PDF boxes with
.I groff
and the
.I ms
macros\[rq],
by Deri James.
.
.
.TP
.I present.tmac
is part of
.UR https://\:bob\:.diertens\:.org/\:corner/\:useful/\:gpresent/
.I gpresent
.UE ,
a software package by Bob Diertens that works with
.I groff
to produce presentations
(\[lq]foils\[rq],
or \[lq]slide decks\[rq]).
.
.
.P
.MR afmtodit 1 ,
.MR groff 1 ,
.MR \%troff 1 ,
.MR groff_font 5 ,
.MR groff_out 5
.\" Not actually referenced in above discussion.
.\" .BR \%pfbtops (1),
.\" .BR \%groff_tmac (5),
.
.
.\" Clean up.
.rm FT
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_gropdf_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_gropdf_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
